THE CURSE OF KEHAMA





First appearing in 1810, this epic poem is formed of twelve books and tells the story of Kehama, a Brahmin priest, as he makes sacrifices to Shiva to gain power and conquer death, wishing to become a god himself. A sub-plot introduces Arvalan, Kehama’s son, who attempts to take Kailyal, a peasant girl. He is stopped by Ladurlad, another peasant, and killed. Kehama decides to war against Yamen, the god of death while also seeking to torture Ladurlad in revenge. Ladurlad is cursed to be separated from nature and unable to live a human life, which included not being able to sleep. However, his separation from nature gives him the ability to do what others cannot.

Southey was partly inspired with the idea for the poem during his school days when he suffered insomnia and was disturbed by thoughts of a dark and mysterious schoolmate, who looked like a ‘fiend’, forming the basis for one of the poem’s villains, the character Arvalan. However, the poem was not started until 1802, following the publication of the other epic Thalaba the Destroyer. After giving up on the poem for a few years, Southey returned to it after the prompting of his friend Walter Savage Landor, who saw great merit in the piece and encouraged Southey to complete the poem. When it was finally published, The Curse of Kehama sold more copies than any of Southey’s other works.

Although the poem describes a Hindu myth, it is heavily influenced by Zoroastrian theology and the ideal of a dualistic moral system. Part of Southey’s focus on India stems from the recent British colonial expansion into India and rising interest of British citizens in Indian culture. The poem received mixed reviews, with many critics praising the quality of language, whilst others felt that the plot and choice of subject matter was lacking. Nevertheless, Southey had achieved commercial success, bringing much needed financial security. The work went through several editions. Shelley called it “my most favourite poem” in a letter of June 1811, and seven years later he modelled Prometheus’s powerful curse on The Curse of Kehama (Prometheus Unbound, Act 1, 779–802). Keats also drew on the poem for several narrative details when composing Endymion.


CONTENTS



PREFACE.

ORIGINAL PREFACE.

I. THE FUNERAL

II. THE CURSE

III. THE RECOVERY.

IV. THE DEPARTURE.

V. THE SEPARATION.

VI. CASYAPA.

VII. THE SWERGA.

VIII. THE SACRIFICE.

IX. THE HOME-SCENE.

X. MOUNT MERU.

XI. THE ENCHANTRESS.

XII. THE SACRIFICE COMPLEATED.

XIII. THE RETREAT.

XIV. JAGA-NAUT.

XV. THE CITY OF BALY.

XVI. THE ANCIENT SEPULCHRES.

XVII. BALY.

XVIII. KEHAMA’S DESCENT.

XIX. MOUNT CALASAY.

XX. THE EMBARKATION.

XXI. THE WORLD’S END.

XXII. THE GATE OF PADALON.

XXIII. PADALON.

XXIV. THE AMREETA.





Walter Savage Landor (1775-1864) was a fellow poet and keen supporter of Southey. His best known works were the prose ‘Imaginary Conversations’, and the poem ‘Rose Aylmer’, but the critical acclaim he received from contemporary poets and reviewers was not matched by public popularity.





TO



THE AUTHOR OF GEBIR,



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR,



THIS POEM IS INSCRIBED,



BY



ROBERT SOUTHEY.





PREFACE.



Several years ago, in the Introduction of my “Letters to Mr. Charles Butler, vindicating the Book of the Church,” I had occasion to state that, while a school-boy at Westminster, I had formed an intention of exhibiting the most remarkable forms of Mythology which have at any time obtained among mankind, by making each the groundwork of a narrative poem. The performance, as might be expected, fell far short of the design, and yet it proved something more than a dream of juvenile ambition.

I began with the Mahommedan religion, as being that with which I was then best acquainted myself, and of which every one who had read the Arabian Nights’ Entertainments possessed all the knowledge necessary for readily understanding and entering into the intent and spirit of the poem. Mr. Wilberforce thought that I had conveyed in it a very false impression of that religion, and that the moral sublimity which he admired in it was owing to this flattering misrepresentation. But Thalaba the Destroyer was professedly an Arabian Tale. The design required that I should bring into view the best features of that system of belief and worship which had been developed under the Covenant with Ishmael, placing in the most favourable light the morality of the Koran, and what the least corrupted of the Mahommedans retain of the patriarchal faith. It would have been altogether incongruous to have touched upon the abominations engrafted upon it; first by the false Prophet himself, who appears to have been far more remarkable for audacious profligacy than for any intellectual endowments, and afterwards by the spirit of Oriental despotism which accompanied Mahommedanism wherever it was established.

Heathen Mythologies have generally been represented by Christian poets as the work of the Devil and his Angels; and the machinery derived from them was thus rendered credible, according to what was during many ages a received opinion. The plan upon which I proceeded in Madoc was to produce the effect of machinery as far as was consistent with the character of the poem, by representing the most remarkable religion of the New World such as it was, a system of atrocious priestcraft. It was not here as in Thalaba the foundation of the poem, but, as usual in what are called epic poems, only incidentally connected with it.

When I took up, for my next subject, that mythology which Sir William Jones had been the first to introduce into English poetry, I soon perceived that the best mode of treating it would be to construct a story altogether mythological. In what form to compose it was then to be determined. No such question had arisen concerning any of my former poems. I should never for a moment have thought of any other measure than blank verse for Joan of Arc, and for Madoc, and afterwards for Roderick. The reason why the irregular rhymeless lyrics of Dr. Sayers were preferred for Thalaba was, that the freedom and variety of such verse were suited to the story. Indeed, of all the laudatory criticisms with which I have been favoured during a long literary life, none ever gratified me more than that of Henry Kirke White upon this occasion, when he observed, that if any other known measure had been adopted, the poem would have been deprived of half its beauty, and all its propriety. And when he added, that the author never seemed to inquire how other men would treat a subject, or what might be the fashion of the times, but took that course which his own sense of fitness pointed out, I could not have desired more appropriate commendation.

The same sense of fitness which made me chuse for an Arabian tale the simplest and easiest form of verse, induced me to take a different course in an Indian poem. It appeared to me, that here neither the tone of morals, nor the strain of poetry, could be pitched too high; that nothing but moral sublimity could compensate for the extravagance of the fictions, and that all the skill I might possess in the art of poetry was required to counterbalance the disadvantage of a mythology with which few readers were likely to be well acquainted, and which would appear monstrous if its deformities were not kept out of sight. I endeavoured, therefore, to combine the utmost richness of versification with the greatest freedom. The spirit of the poem was Indian, but there was nothing Oriental in the style. I had learnt the language of poetry from our own great masters and the great poets of antiquity.

No poem could have been more deliberately planned, nor more carefully composed. It was commenced at Lisbon on the first of May, 1801, and recommenced in the summer of the same year at Kingsdown, in the same house (endeared to me once by many delightful but now mournful recollections) in which Madoc had been finished, and Thalaba begun. A little was added during the winter of that year in London. It was resumed at Kingsdown in the summer of 1802, and then laid aside till 1806, during which interval Madoc was reconstructed and published. Resuming it then once more, all that had been written was recast at Keswick: there I proceeded with it leisurely, and finished it on the 25th of November, 1809. It is the only one of my long poems of which detached parts were written to be afterwards inserted in their proper places. Were I to name the persons to whom it was communicated during its progress, it would be admitted now that I might well be encouraged by their approbation; and, indeed, when it was published, I must have been very unreasonable if I had not been satisfied with its reception.

It was not till the present edition of these Poems was in the press, that, eight and twenty years after Kehama had been published, I first saw the article upon it in the Monthly Review, parts of which cannot be more appropriately preserved any where than here; it shows the determination with which the Reviewer entered upon his task, and the importance which he attached to it.

“Throughout our literary career we cannot recollect a more favourable opportunity than the present for a full discharge of our critical duty. We are indeed bound now to make a firm stand for the purity of our poetic taste against this last and most desperate assault, conducted as it is by a writer of considerable reputation, and unquestionably of considerable abilities. If this poem were to be tolerated, all things after it may demand impunity, and it will be in vain to contend hereafter for any one established rule of poetry as to design and subject, as to character and incident, as to language and versification. We may return at once to the rude hymn in honour of Bacchus, and indite strains adapted to the recitation of rustics in the season of the vintage: —



Quæ canerent agerentque peruncti fœcibus ora.



It shall be our plan to establish these points, we hope, beyond reasonable controversy, by a complete analysis of the twenty four sections (as they may truly be called) of the portentous work, and by ample quotations interspersed with remarks, in which we shall endeavour to withhold no praise that can fairly be claimed, and no censure that is obviously deserved.”

The reviewer fulfilled his promises, however much he failed in his object. He was not more liberal of censure than of praise, and he was not sparing of quotations. The analysis was sufficiently complete for the purposes of criticism, except that the critic did not always give himself the trouble to understand what he was determined to ridicule. “It is necessary for us,” he said, “ according to our purpose of deterring future writers from the choice of such a story, or for such a management of that story, to detail the gross follies of the work in question; and tedious as the operation may be, we trust that in the judgement of all those lovers of literature who duly value the preservation of sound principles of composition among us, the end will excuse the means.” The means were ridicule and reprobation, and the end at which he aimed was thus stated in the Reviewer’s peroration.



“We know not that Mr. Southey’s most devoted admirers can complain of our having omitted a single incident essential to the display of his character or the developement of his plot. To other readers we should apologise for our prolixity, were we not desirous, as we hinted before, of giving a death-blow to the gross extravagancies of the author’s school of poetry, if we cannot hope to reform so great an offender as himself. In general, all that nature and all that art has lavished on him is rendered useless by his obstinate adherence to his own system of fancied originality, in which every thing that is good is old, and every thing that is new is good for nothing. Convinced as we are that many of the author’s faults proceed from mere idleness, deserving even less indulgence than the erroneous principles of his poetical system, we shall conclude by a general exhortation to all critics to condemn, and to all writers to avoid the example of combined carelessness and perversity which is here afforded by Mr. Southey: and we shall mark this last and worst eccentricity of his Muse with the following character: — Here is the composition of a poet not more distinguished by his genius and knowledge, than by his contempt for public opinion, and the utter depravity of his taste, — a depravity which is incorrigible, and, we are sorry to add, most unblushingly rejoicing in its own hopelessness of amendment.”



The Monthly Review has, I believe, been for some years defunct. I never knew to whom I was beholden for the good service rendered me in that Journal, when such assistance was of most value; nor by whom I was subsequently, during several years, favoured in the same Journal with such flagrant civilities as those of which the reader has here seen a sample.



Keswick, 19th May, 1838.





ORIGINAL PREFACE.



In the religion of the Hindoos, which of all false religions is the most monstrous in its fables, and the most fatal in its effects, there is one remarkable peculiarity. Prayers, penances, and sacrifices, are supposed to possess an inherent and actual value, in no degree depending upon the disposition or motive of the person who performs them. They an- drafts upon Heaven, for which the Gods cannot refuse payment. The worst men, bent upon the worst designs, have in this manner obtained power which has made them formidable to the Supreme Deities themselves, and rendered an Avatar, or Incantation of Veeshnoo the Preserver, necessary. This belief is the foundation of the following Poem. The story is original; but, in all its parts, consistent with the superstition upon which it is built: and however startling the fictions may appear, they might almost be called credible when compared with the genuine tales of Hindoo mythology.

No figures can be imagined more anti-picturesque, and less poetical, than the mythological personages of the Bramins. This deformity was easily kept out of sight: — their hundred hands are but a clumsy personification of power; their numerous heads only a gross image of divinity, “whose countenance,” as the Bhagvat-Geeta expresses it, “is turned on every side.” To the other obvious objection, that the religion of Hindostan is not generally known enough to supply fit machinery for an English poem, I can only answer, that, if every allusion to it throughout the work is not sufficiently self-explained to render the passage intelligible, there is a want of skill in the poet. Even those readers who should be wholly unacquainted with the writings of our learned Orientalists, will find all the preliminary knowledge that can be needful, in the brief explanation of mythological names prefixed to the Poem.





BRAMA.... the Creator.



VEESHSOO,.. the Preserver.



SEEVA...the Destroyer.



These form the Trimourtee, or Trinity, as it has been called, of the Bramins. The allegory is obvious, but has been made for the Trimourtee, not the Trimourtee for the allegory; and these Deities are regarded by the people as three distinct and personal Gods. The two latter have at this day their hostile sects of worshippers; that of Seeva is the most numerous; and in this Poem, Seeva is represented as Supreme among the Gods. This is the same God whose name is variously written Seeb, Sieven, and Siva, Chiven by the French, Xiven by the Portuguese, and whom European writers sometimes denominate Eswara, Iswaren, Mahadeo, Mahadeva, Rutren,... according to which of his thousand and eight names prevailed in the country where they obtained their information.



INDRA...God of the Elements.



The SWERGA... his Paradise,... one of the Hindoo heavens.



YAMEN...Lord of Hell, and Judge of the Dead.



PADALON...Hell,... under the Earth, and, like the Earth, of an octagon shape; its eight gates are guarded by as many Gods.



MARRIATALY, the Goddess who is chiefly worshipped by the lower casts.



POLLEAR...or Ganesa,... the Protector of Travellers. His statues are placed in the highways, and sometimes in a small lonely sanctuary, in the streets and in the fields.



CASTARA...the Father of the Immortals.



DEVETAS...The Inferior Deities.



SURAS...Good Spirits.



ASURAS...Evil Spirits, or Devils.



GLENDOVEERS, the most beautiful of the Good Spirits, the Grindouvers of Sonnerat.





THE CURSE OF KEHAMA



I. THE FUNERAL



1



Midnight, and yet no eye

Through all the Imperial City closed in sleep!

Behold her streets a-blaze

With light that seems to kindle the red sky,

Her myriads swarming through the crowded ways!

Master and slave, old age and infancy,

All, all abroad to gaze;

House-top and balcony

Clustered with women, who throw back their veils

With unimpeded and insatiate sight

To view the funeral pomp which passes by,

As if the mournful rite

Were but to them a scene of joyance and delight.



2



Vainly, ye blessed twinklers of the night,

Your feeble beams ye shed,

Quench’d in the unnatural light which might out-stare

Even the broad eye of day;

And thou from thy celestial way

Pourest, O Moon, an ineffectual ray!

For lo! ten thousand torches flame and flare

Upon the midnight air,

Blotting the lights of heaven

With one portentous glare.

Behold the fragrant smoke in many a fold

Ascending, floats along the fiery sky,

And hangeth visible on high,

A dark and waving canopy.



3



Hark! ’tis the funeral trumpet’s breath!

’Tis the dirge of death!

At once ten thousand drums begin,

With one long thunder-peal the ear assailing;

Ten thousand voices then join in,

And with one deep and general din

Pour their wild wailing.

The song of praise is drown’d

Amid the deafening sound;

You hear no more the trumpet’s tone,

You hear no more the mourner’s moan,

Though the trumpet’s breath, and the dirge of death,

Swell with commingled force the funeral yell.

But rising over all in one acclaim

Is heard the echoed and re-echoed name,

From all that countless rout;

“Arvalan! Arvalan!

Arvalan! Arvalan!”

Ten times ten thousand voices in one shout

Call “Arvalan!” The overpowering sound,

From house to house repeated rings about,

From tower to tower rolls round.



4



The death-procession moves along;

Their bald heads shining to the torches’ ray,

The Bramins lead the way,

Chaunting the funeral song.

And now at once they shout,

“Arvalan! Arvalan!”

With quick rebound of sound,

All in accordance cry,

“Arvalan! Arvalan!”

The universal multitude reply.

In vain ye thunder on his ear the name;

Would ye awake the dead?

Borne upright in his palankeen,

There Arvalan is seen!

A glow is on his face,... a lively red;

It is the crimson canopy

Which o’er his cheek a reddening shade hath shed;

He moves,... he nods his head,...

But the motion comes from the bearers’ tread,

As the body, borne aloft in state,

Sways with the impulse of its own dead weight.



5



Close following his dead son, Kehama came,

Nor joining in the ritual song,

Nor calling the dear name;

With head deprest and funeral vest,

And arms enfolded on his breast,

Silent and lost in thought he moves along.

King of the World, his slaves, unenvying now,

Behold their wretched Lord; rejoiced they see

The mighty Rajah’s misery;

That Nature in his pride hath dealt the blow,

And taught the Master of Mankind to know

Even he himself is man, and not exempt from woe.



6



O sight of grief! the wives of Arvalan,

Young Azla, young Nealliny, are seen!

Their widow-robes of white,

With gold and jewels bright,

Each like an Eastern queen.

Woe! woe! around their palankeen,

As on a bridal day,

With symphony, and dance, and song,

Their kindred and their friends come on.

The dance of sacrifice! the funeral song!

And next the victim slaves in long array,

Richly bedight to grace the fatal day,

Move onward to their death;

The clarions’ stirring breath

Lifts their thin robes in every flowing fold,

And swells the woven gold,

That on the agitated air

Flutters and glitters to the torch’s glare.



7



A man and maid of aspect wan and wild,

Then, side by side, by bowmen guarded, came;

O wretched father! O unhappy child!

Them were all eyes of all the throng exploring...

Is this the daring man

Who raised his fatal hand at Arvalan?

Is this the wretch condemn’d to feel

Kehama’s dreadful wrath?

Then were all hearts of all the throng deploring;

For not in that innumerable throng

Was one who loved the dead; for who could know

What aggravated wrong

Provoked the desperate blow!



8



Far, far behind, beyond all reach of sight,

In order’d files the torches flow along,

One ever-lengthening line of gliding light:

Far... far behind,

Rolls on the undistinguishable clamour,

Of horn, and trump, and tambour;

Incessant as the roar

Of streams which down the wintry mountain pour,

And louder than the dread commotion

Of breakers on a rocky shore,

When the winds rage over the waves,

And Ocean to the Tempest raves.



9



And now toward the bank they go,

Where winding on their way below,

Deep and strong the waters flow.

Here doth the funeral pile appear

With myrrh and ambergris bestrew’d,

And built of precious sandal wood.

They cease their music and their outcry here,

Gently they rest the bier;

They wet the face of Arvalan,

No sign of life the sprinkled drops excite;

They feel his breast,... no motion there;

They feel his lips,... no breath;

For not with feeble, nor with erring hand,

The brave avenger dealt the blow of death.

Then with a doubling peal and deeper blast,

The tambours and the trumpets sound on high,

And with a last and loudest cry,

They call on Arvalan.



10



Woe! woe! for Azla takes her seat

Upon the funeral pile!

Calmly she took her seat,

Calmly the whole terrific pomp survey’d;

As on her lap the while

The lifeless head of Arvalan was laid.



11



Woe! woe! Nealliny,

The young Nealliny!

They strip her ornaments away,

Bracelet and anklet, ring, and chain, and zone;

Around her neck they leave

The marriage knot alone,...

That marriage band, which when

Yon waning moon was young,

Around her virgin neck

With bridal joy was hung.

Then with white flowers, the coronal of death,

Her jetty locks they crown.



12



O sight of misery!

You cannot hear her cries,... their sound

In that wild dissonance is drown’d;...

But in her face you see

The supplication and the agony,...

See in her swelling throat the desperate strength

That with vain effort struggles yet for life;

Her arms contracted now in fruitless strife,

Now wildly at full length

Towards the crowd in vain for pity spread,...

They force her on, they bind her to the dead.



13



Then all around retire;

Circling the pile, the ministering Bramins stand,

Each lifting in his hand a torch on fire.

Alone the Father of the dead advanced

And lit the funeral pyre.



14



At once on every side

The circling torches drop,

At once on every side

The fragrant oil is pour’d,

At once on every side

The rapid flames rush up.

Then hand in hand the victim band

Roll in the dance around the funeral pyre;

Their garments’ flying folds

Float inward to the fire;

In drunken whirl they wheel around;

One drops,... another plunges in;

And still with overwhelming din

The tambours and the trumpets sound;

And clap of hand, and shouts, and cries,

From all the multitude arise;

While round and round, in giddy wheel,

Intoxicate they roll and reel,

Till one by one whirl’d in they fall,

And the devouring flames have swallow’d all.



15



Then all was still; the drums and clarions ceased;

The multitude were hush’d in silent awe;

Only the roaring of the flames was heard.





II. THE CURSE



1



Alone towards the Table of the Dead

Kehama moved; there on the alter-stone

Honey and rice he spread.

There with collected voice and painful tone

He call’d upon his son.

Lo! Arvalan appears;

Only Kehama’s powerful eye beheld

The thin ethereal spirit hovering nigh;

Only the Rajah’s ear

Received his feeble breath.

“And is this all?” the mournful Spirit said,

“This all that thou canst give me after death?

This unavailing pomp,

These empty pageantries that mock the dead!”



2



In bitterness the Rajah heard,

And groan’d, and smote his breast,and o’er his face

Cowl’d the white mourning vest.



3



ARVALAN

“Art thou not powerful,... even like a God?

And must I, through my years of wandering,

Shivering and naked to the elements,

In wretchedness await

The hour of Yamen’s wrath?

I thought thou wouldst embody me anew,

Undying as I am,...

Yea, re-create me!... Father, is this all?

This all? and thou Almighty!”



4



But in that wrongful and upbraiding tone,

Kehama found relief,

For rising anger half supprest his grief.

“Reproach not me!” he cried,

“Had I not spell-secured thee from disease,

Fire, sword,... all common accidents of man,...

And thou!... fool, fool... to perish by a stake!

And by a peasant’s arm!...

Even now, when from reluctant Heaven,

Forcing new gifts and mightier attributes,

So soon I should have quell’d the Death-God’s power.”



5



“Waste not thy wrath on me,” quoth Arvalan,

“It was my hour of folly! Fate prevail’d,

Nor boots it to reproach me that I fell.

I am in misery, Father! Other souls

Predoom’d to Indra’s Heaven, enjoy the dawn

Of bliss,... to them the temper’d elements

Minister joy: genial delight the sun

Sheds on their happy being, and the stars

Effuse on them benignant influences;

And thus o’er earth and air they roam at will,

And when the number of their days is full,

Go fearlessly before the aweful throne.

But I,... all naked feeling and raw life,...

What worse than this hath Yamen’s hell in store?

If ever thou didst love me, mercy, Father!

Save me, for thou canst save... the Elements

Know and obey thy voice.”



6



KEHAMA

“The Elements

Shall sin no more against thee; whilst I speak

Already dost thou feel their power is gone.

Fear not! I cannot call again the past,

Fate hath made that its own; but Fate shall yield

To me the future; and thy doom be fix’d

By mine, not Yamen’s will. Meantime all power

Whereof thy feeble spirit can be made

Participant, I give. Is there aught else

To mitigate thy lot?”



ARVALAN

“Only the sight of vengeance. Give me that!

Vengeance, full, worthy, vengeance!... not the stroke

Of sudden punishment,... no agony

That spends itself and leaves the wretch at rest,

But lasting long revenge.”



KEHAMA

“What, boy? is that cup sweet? then take thy fill!”



7



So as he spake, a glow of dreadful pride

Inflamed his cheek, with quick and angry stride

He moved toward the pile,

And raised his hand to hush the crowd, and cried,

“Bring forth the murderer!” At the Rajah’s voice

Calmly, and like a man whom fear had stunn’d,

Ladurlad came, obedient to the call;

But Kailyal started at the sound,

And gave a womanly shriek, and back she drew,

And eagerly she roll’d her eyes around,

As if to seek for aid, albeit she knew

No aid could there be found.



8



It chanced that near her on the river brink,

The sculptured form of Marriataly stood;

It was an Idol roughly hewn of wood,

Artless, and mean, and rude;

The Goddess of the poor was she;

None else regarded her with piety.

But when that holy Image Kailyal view’d,

To that she sprung, to that she clung,

On her own Goddess, with close-clasping arms,

For life the maiden hung.



9



They seized the maid; with unrelenting grasp

They bruised her tender limbs;

She, nothing yielding, to this only hope

Clings with the strength of frenzy and despair.

She screams not now, she breathes not now,

She sends not up one vow,

She forms not in her soul one secret prayer,

All thought, all feeling, and all powers of life

In the one effort centering. Wrathful they

With tug and strain would force the maid away;...

Didst thou, O Marriataly, see their strife,

In pity didst thou see the suffering maid?

Or was thine anger kindled, that rude hands

Assail’d thy holy Image?... for behold

The holy image shakes!



10



Irreverently bold, they deem the maid

Relax’d her stubborn hold,

And now with force redoubled drag their prey;

And now the rooted Idol to their sway

Bends,... yields,... and now it falls.

But then they scream,

For lo! they feel the crumbling bank give way,

And all are plunged into the stream.



11



“She hath escaped my will,” Kehama cried,

“She hath escaped,... but thou art here,

I have thee still,

The worser criminal!”

And on Ladurlad, while he spake, severe

He fix’d his dreadful frown.

The strong reflection of the pile

Lit his dark lineaments,

Lit the protruded brow, the gathered front,

The steady eye of wrath.



12



But while the fearful silence yet endured,

Ladurlad roused himself;

Ere yet the voice of destiny

Which trembled on the Rajah’s lips was loosed,

Eager he interposed,

As if despair had waken’d him to hope;

“Mercy! oh mercy! only in defence...

Only instinctively,...

Only to save my child, I smote the Prince;

King of the world, be merciful!

Crush me,... but torture not!”



13



The Man-Almighty deign’d him no reply,

Still he stood silent; in no human mood

Of mercy, in no hesitating thought

Of right and justice. At the length he raised

His brow yet unrelax’d,... his lips unclosed,

And uttered from the heart,

With the whole feeling of his soul enforced,

The gathered vengeance came.



14



“I charm thy life

From the weapons of strife,

From stone and from wood,

From fire and from flood,

From the serpent’s tooth,

And the beasts of blood:

From Sickness I charm thee,

And Time shall not harm thee;

But Earth which is mine,

Its fruits shall deny thee;

And Water shall hear me,

And know thee and fly thee;

And the Winds shall not touch thee

When they pass by thee,

And the Dews shall not wet thee,

When they fall nigh thee:

And thou shalt seek Death

To release thee, in vain;

Thou shalt live in thy pain

While Kehama shall reign,

With a fire in thy heart,

And a fire in thy brain;

And Sleep shall obey me,

And visit thee never,

And the Curse shall be on thee

For ever and ever.”



15



There where the Curse had stricken him,

There stood the miserable man,

There stood Ladurlad, with loose-hanging arms;

And eyes of idiot wandering.

Was it a dream? alas,

He heard the river flow,

He heard the crumbling of the pile,

He heard the wind which shower’d

The thin white ashes round.

There motionless he stood,

As if he hoped it were a dream,

And feared to move, lest he should prove

The actual misery;

And still at times he met Kehama’s eye,

Kehama’s eye that fastened on him still.



* * *





III. THE RECOVERY.



1.



The Rajah turn’d toward the pile again,

Loud rose the song of death from all the crowd;

Their din the instruments begin,

And once again join in

With overwhelming sound.

Ladurlad starts,... he looks around.

What hast thou here in view,

O wretched man, in this disastrous scene?

The soldier train, the Bramins who renew

Their ministry around the funeral pyre,

The empty palankeens,

The dimly-fading fire.

Where too is she whom most his heart held dear,

His best-beloved Kailyal, where is she,

The solace and the joy of many a year

Of widowhood! is she then gone,

And is he left all-utterly alone,

To bear his blasting curse, and none

To succour or deplore him?

He staggers from the dreadful spot; the throng

Give way in fear before him;

Like one who carries pestilence about,

Shuddering they shun him, where he moves along.

And now he wanders on

Beyond the noisy rout;

He cannot fly and leave his curse behind,

Yet doth he seem to find

A comfort in the change of circumstance.

Adown the shore he strays,

Unknowing where his wretched feet may rest,

But farthest from the fatal place is best.



2.



By this in the orient sky appears the gleam

Of day. Lo! what is yonder in the stream,

Down the slow river floating slow,

In distance indistinct and dimly seen?

The childless one with idle eye

Followed its motion thoughtlessly;

Idly he gaz’d, unknowing why,

And half unconscious that he watch’d its way.

Belike it is a tree

Which some rude tempest, in its sudden sway,

Tore from the rock, or from the hollow shore

The undermining stream hath swept away.



3.



But when anon outswelling by its side,

A woman’s robe he spied,

Oh then Ladurlad started,

As one, who in his grave

Had heard an angel’s call.

Yea, Marriataly, thou hast deign’d to save!

Yea, Goddess! it is she,

To thy dear image clinging senselessly,

And thus in happy hour

Upborne amid the wave

By that preserving power.



4.



Headlong in hope and in joy

Ladurlad dash’d in the water.

The water knew Kehama’s spell,

The water shrunk before him.

Blind to the miracle,

He rushes to his daughter,

And treads the river-depths in transport wild,

And clasps and saves his child.



5.



Upon the farther side a level shore

Of sand was spread: thither Ladurlad bore

His daughter, holding still with senseless hand

The saving Goddess; there upon the sand

He laid the livid maid,

Rais’d up against his knees her drooping head;

Bent to her lips,... her lips as pale as death,...

If he might, feel her breath,

His own the while in hope and dread suspended;

Chaf’d her cold breast, and ever and anon

Let his hand rest upon her heart extended.



6.



Soon did his touch perceive, or fancy there,

The first faint motion of returning life.

He chafes her feet, and lays them bare

In the sun; and now again upon her breast

Lays his hot hand; and now her lips he prest,

For now the stronger throb of life he knew:

And her lips tremble too!

The breath comes palpably,

Her quivering lids unclose

Feebly and feebly fall,

Relapsing as it seem’d to dead repose.



7.



So in her father’s arms thus languidly,

While over her with earnest gaze he hung,

Silent and motionless she lay,

And painfully and slowly writh’d at fits,

At fits to short convulsive starts was stung.

Till when the struggle and strong agony

Had left her, quietly she lay repos’d:

Her eyes now resting on Ladurlad’s face,

Relapsing now, and now again unclos’d.

The look she fix’d upon his face, implies

Nor thought nor feeling; senselessly she lies,

Compos’d like one who sleeps with open eyes.



8.



Long he leant over her,

In silence and in fear.

Kailyal!... at length he cried in such a tone,

As a poor mother ventures who draws near,

With silent footstep, to her child’s sick bed.

My Father! cried the maid, and rais’d her head,

Awakening then to life and thought,... thou here?

For when his voice she heard,

The dreadful past recurr’d,

Which dimly, like a dream of pain,

Till now with troubled sense confus’d her brain.



9.



And hath he spar’d us then? she cried,

Half rising as she spake,

For hope and joy the sudden strength supplied;

In mercy hath he curb’d his cruel will,

That still thou livest? But as thus she said,

Impatient of that look of hope, her sire

Shook hastily his head;

Oh! he hath laid a Curse upon my life,

A clinging curse, quoth he;

Hath sent a fire into my heart and brain,

A burning fire, for ever there to be!

The winds of Heaven must never breathe on me;

The rains and dews must never fall on me;

Water must mock my thirst and shrink from me;

The common earth must yield no fruit to me;

Sleep, blessed Sleep! must never light on me;

And Death, who comes to all, must fly from me;

And never, never set Ladurlad free.



10.



This is a dream! exclaim’d the incredulous maid,

Yet in her voice the while a fear exprest,

Which in her larger eye was manifest.

This is a dream! she rose and laid her hand

Upon her father’s brow, to try the charm;

He could not bear the pressure there;... he shrunk,...

He warded off her arm,

As though it were an enemy’s blow, he smote

His daughter’s arm aside.

Her eye glanced down, his mantle she espied

And caught it up;... Oh misery! Kailyal cried,

He bore me from the river-depths, and yet

His garment is not wet!





IV. THE DEPARTURE.



1.



Reclin’d beneath a Cocoa’s feathery shade Ladurlad lies,

And Kailyal on his lap her head hath laid,

To hide her streaming eyes.

The boatman, sailing on his easy way,

With envious eye beheld them where they lay;

For every herb and flower

Was fresh and fragrant with the early dew;

Sweet sung the birds in that delicious hour,

And the cool gale of morning as it blew,

Not yet subdued by day’s increasing power,

Ruffling the surface of the silvery stream,

Swept o’er the moisten’d sand, and rais’d no shower.

Telling their tale of love,

The boatman thought they lay

At that lone hour, and who so blest as they!



2.



But now the sun in heaven is high,

The little songsters of the sky

Sit silent in the sultry hour,

They pant and palpitate with heat;

Their bills are open languidly

To catch the passing air;

They hear it not, they feel it not,

It murmurs not, it moves not.

The boatman, as he looks to land,

Admires what men so mad to linger there,

For yonder Cocoa’s shade behind them falls,

A single spot upon the burning sand.



3.



There all the morning was Ladurlad laid,

Silent and motionless, like one at ease;

There motionless upon her father’s knees,

Reclin’d the silent maid.

The man was still, pondering with steady mind,

As if it; were another’s Curse,

His own portentous lot;

Scanning it o’er and o’er in busy thought,

As though it were a last night’s tale of woe,

Before the cottage door,

By some old beldame sung,

While young and old assembled round,

Listened, as if by witchery bound,

In fearful pleasure to her wonderous tongue.



4.



Musing so long he lay, that all things seem

Unreal to his sense, even like a dream,

A monstrous dream of things which could not be.

That beating, burning brow,... why it was now

The height of noon, and he was lying there

In the broad sun, all bare!

What if he felt no wind? the air was still,

That was the general will

Of nature, not his own peculiar doom;

Yon rows of rice erect and silent stand,

The shadow of the Cocoa’s lightest plume

Is steady on the sand.



5.



Is it indeed a dream? he rose to try,

Impatient to the water-side he went,

And down he bent,

And in the stream he plung’d his hasty arm

To break the visionary charm.

With fearful eye and fearful heart,

His daughter watch’d the event;

She saw the start and shudder,

She heard the in-drawn groan,

For the Water knew Kehama’s charm,

The water shrunk before his arm.

His dry hand mov’d about unmoisten’d there;

As easily might that dry hand avail

To stop the passing gale,

Or grasp the impassive air.

He is Almighty then!

Exclaim’d the wretched man in his despair;

AJr knows him, Water knows him; Sleep

His dreadful word will keep;

Even in the grave there is no rest for me,

Cut off from that last hope,... the wretches’ joy;

And Veeshnoo hath no power to save,

Nor Seeva to destroy.



6.



Oh! wrong not them! quoth Kailyal,

Wrong not the Heavenly Powers!

Our hope is all in them: They are not blind!

And lighter wrongs than ours,

And lighter crimes than his,

Have drawn the Incarnate down among mankind.

Already have the Immortals heard our cries,

And in the mercy of their righteousness

Beheld us in the hour of our distress!

She spake with streaming eyes,

Where pious love and ardent feeling beam;

And turning to the Image, threw

Her grateful arms around it,... It was thou

Who saved’st me from the stream!

My Marriataly, it was thou!

I had not else been here

To share my Father’s Curse,

To suffer now,... and yet to thank thee thus!



7.



Here then, the maiden cried, dear Father, here

Raise our own Goddess, our divine Preserver!

The mighty of the earth despise her rites,

She loves the poor who serve her.

Set up her image here,

With heart and voice the guardian Goddess bless,

For jealously would she resent

Neglect and thanklessness....

Set up her image here,

And bless her for her aid with tongue and soul sincere.



8.



So saying, on her knees the maid

Began the pious toil.

Soon their joint labour scoops the easy soil;

They raise the image up with reverent hand,

And round its rooted base they heap the sand.

O Thou whom we adore,

O Marriataly, thee do I implorer

The virgin cried; my Goddess, pardon thou

The unwilling wrong, that I no more,

With dance and song,

Can do thy daily service, as of yore!

The flowers which last I wreath’d around thy brow,

Are withering there; and never now

Shall I at eve adore thee,

And swimming round with arms outspread,

Poise the full pitcher on my head,

In dextrous dance before thee;

While underneath the reedy shed, at rest,

My father sate the evening rites to view,

And blest thy name, and blest

His daughter too.



9.



Then heaving from her heart a heavy sigh,

O Goddess! from that happy home, cried she,

The Almighty Man hath forced us!

And homeward with the thought unconsciously

She turn’d her dizzy eye.... But there on high,

With many a dome, and pinnacle, and spire,

The summits of the Golden Palaces

Blaz’d in the dark blue sky, aloft, like fire.

Father, away! she cried, away!

Why linger we so nigh?

For not to him hath Nature given

The thousand eyes of Deity,

Always and every where with open sight,

To persecute our flight!

Away... away! she said,

And took her father’s hand, and like a child

He followed where she led.





V. THE SEPARATION.



1.



Evening comes on: arising from the stream,

Homeward the tall flamingo wings his flight;

And where he sails athwart the setting beam,

His scarlet plumage glows with deeper light.

The watchman, at the wish’d approach of night,

Gladly forsakes the field, where he all day,

To scare the winged plunderers from their prey,

With shout and sling, on yonder clay-built height;

Hath borne the sultry ray.

Hark! at the Golden Palaces,

The Bramin strikes the hour.

For leagues and leagues around, the brazen sound

Rolls through the stillness of departing day,

Like thunder far away.



2.



Behold them wandering on their hopeless way,

Unknowing where they stray,

Yet sure where’er they stop to find no rest.

The evening gale is blowing,

It plays among the trees;

Like plumes upon a warrior’s crest,

They see yon cocoas tossing to the breeze.

Ladurlad views them with impatient mind,

Impatiently he hears

The gale of evening blowing,

The sound of waters flowing,

As if all sights and sounds combin’d

To mock his irremediable woe!

For not for him the blessed waters flow,

For not for him the gales of evening blow,

A fire is in his heart and brain,

And Nature hath no healing for his pain.



3.



The Moon is up, still pale

Amid the lingering light.

A cloud ascending in the eastern sky,

Sails slowly o’er the vale,

And darkens round and closes-in the night.

No hospitable house is nigh,

No traveller’s home the wanderers to invite.

Forlorn, and with long watching overworn,

The wretched father and the wretched child

Lie down amid the wild,



4.



Before them full in sight,

A white flag flapping to the winds of night,

Marks where the tyger seiz’d his human prey.

Far, far away with natural dread,

Shunning the perilous spot,

At other times abhorrent had they fled;

But now they heed it not.

Nothing they care; the boding death-flag now

In vain for them may gleam and flutter there.

Despair and agony in him,

Prevent all other thought;

And Kailyal hath no heart or sense for aught,

Save her dear father’s strange and miserable lot.



5.



There in the woodland shade,

Upon the lap of that unhappy maid,

His head Ladurlad laid,

And never word he spake;

Nor heav’d he one complaining sigh,

Nor groan’d he with his misery,

But silently for her dear sake

Endur’d the raging pain.

And now the moon was hid on high,

No stars were glimmering in the sky;

She could not see her father’s eye,

How red with burning agony.

Perhaps he may be cooler now;

She hoped, and long’d to touch his brow

With gentle hand, yet did not dare

To lay the painful pressure there.

Now forward from the tree she bent,

And anxiously her head she leant,

And listened to his breath.

Ladurlad’s breath was short and quick.

Yet regular it came,

And like the slumber of the sick,

In pantings still the same.

Oh if he sleeps!... her lips unclose,

Intently listening to the sound,

That equal sound so like repose.

Still quietly the sufferer lies,

Bearing his torment now with resolute will;

He neither moves, nor groans, nor sighs.

Doth satiate cruelty bestow

This little respite to his woe,

She thought, or are there Gods who look below!



6.



Perchance, thought Kailyal, willingly deceiv’d,

Our Marriataly hath his pain reliev’d,

And she hath bade the blessed sleep assuage

His agony, despite the Rajah’s rage.

That was a hope which fill’d her gushing eyes,

And made her heart in silent yearnings rise,

To bless the Power divine in thankfulness.

And yielding to that joyful thought her mind,

Backward the maid her aching head reclin’d

Against the tree, and to her father’s breath

In fear she hearken’d still with earnest ear.

But soon forgetful fits the effort broke:

In starts of recollection then she woke;

Till now benignant Nature overcame

The Virgin’s weary and exhausted frame,

Nor able more her painful watch to keep,

She clos’d her heavy lids, and sunk to sleep.



7.



Vain was her hope! he did not rest from pain,

The Curse was burning in his brain.

Alas! the innocent maiden thought he slept,

But Sleep the Rajah’s dread commandment kept,

Sleep knew Kehama’s Curse.

The dews of night fell round them now,

They never bath’d Ladurlad’s brow,

They knew Kehama’s Curse.

The night-wind is abroad,

Aloft it moves among the stirring trees.

He only heard the breeze,...

No healing aid to him it brought,

It play’d around his head and touch’d him not,

It knew Kehama’s Curse.



8.



Listening, Ladurlad lay in his despair,

If Kailyal slept, for wherefore should she share

Her father’s wretchedness which none could cure?

Better alone to suffer; he must bear

The burthen of his Curse, but why endure

The unavailing presence of her grief?

She too, apart from him, might find relief;

For dead the Rajah deem’d her, and as thus

Already she his dread revenge had fled,

So might she still escape and live secure.



9.



Gently he lifts his head,

And Kailyal does not feel;

Gently he rises up,... she slumbers still;

Gently he steals away with silent tread.

Anon she started, for she felt him gone;

She call’d, and through the stillness of the night,

His step was heard in flight.

Mistrustful for a moment of the sound,

She listens! till the step is heard no more;

But then she knows that he indeed is gone,

And with a thrilling shriek she rushes on.

The darkness and the wood impede her speed;

She lifts her voice again,

Ladurlad!... and again, alike in vain.

And with a louder cry

Straining its tone to hoarseness;... far away

Selfish in misery,

He heard the call and faster did he fly.



10.



She leans against that tree whose jutting bough

Smote her so rudely. Her poor heart

How audibly it panted,

With sudden stop and start:

Her breath how short and painfully it came!

Hark! all is still around her,...

And the night so utterly dark,

She opened her eyes and she closed them,

And the blackness and blank were the same.



11.



’Twas like a dream of horror, and she stood

Half doubting whether all indeed were true.

A Tyger’s howl loud echoing through the wood,

Rous’d her; the dreadful sound she knew,

And turn’d instinctively to what she fear’d.

Far off the Tyger’s hungry howl was heard;

A nearer horror met the maiden’s view,

For right before her a dim form appear’d,

A human form in that black night,

Distinctly shaped by its own lurid light,

Such light as the sickly moon is seen to shed,

Through spell-rais’d fogs, a bloody baleful red,



12.



That Spectre fix’d his eyes upon her full;

The light which shone in their accursed orbs

Was like a light from Hell,

And it grew deeper, kindling with the view.

She could not turn her sight

From that infernal gaze, which like a spell

Bound her, and held her rooted to the ground.

It palsied every power;

Her limbs avail’d her not in that dread hour.

There was no moving thence,

Thought, memory, sense were gone:

She heard not now the Tyger’s nearer cry,

She thought not on her father now,

Her cold heart’s-blood ran back, i

Her hand lay senseless on the bough it clasp’d,

Her feet were motionless;

Her fascinated eyes

Like the stone eye-balls of a statue fix’d,

Yet conscious of the sight that blasted them.



13.



The wind is abroad,

It opens the clouds;

Scattered before the gale,

They skurry through the sky,

And the darkness retiring rolls over the vale.

The stars in their beauty come forth on high,

And through the dark-blue night

The moon rides on triumphant, broad and bright.

Distinct and darkening in her light

Appears that Spectre foul.

The moon beam gives his face and form to sight,

The shape of man,

The living form and face of Arvalan!

His hands are spread to clasp, her.



14.



But at that sight of dread the maid awoke;

As if a lightning-stroke

Had burst the spell of fear,

Away she broke all franticly and fled.

There stood a temple near beside the way,

An open fane of Pollear, gentle God,

To whom the travellers for protection pray.

With elephantine head and eye severe,

Here stood his image, such as when he seiz’d

And tore the rebel giant from the ground,

With mighty trunk wreath’d round

His impotent bulk, and on his tusks, on high

Impal’d upheld him between earth and sky.



15.



Thither the affrighted maiden sped her flight,

And she hath reach’d the place of sanctuary;

And now within the temple in despite,

Yea, even before the altar, in his sight,

Hath Arvalan with fleshly arm of might

Seiz’d her. That instant the insulted God

Caught him aloft, and from his sinuous grasp,

As if from some tort catapult let loose,

Over the forest hurl’d him all abroad.



16.



O’ercome with dread,

She tarried not to see what heavenly power

Had saved her in that hour.

Breathless and faint she fled.

And now her foot struck on the knotted root

Of a broad manchineil, and there the maid

Fell senselessly beneath the deadly shade.





VI. CASYAPA.



1.



Shall this then be thy fate, O lovely Maid,

Thus, Kailyal, must thy sorrows then be ended!

Her face upon the ground,

Her arms at length extended,

There like a corpse behold her laid,

Beneath the deadly shade.

What if the hungry Tyger, prowling by,

Should snuff his banquet nigh?

Alas, Death needs not now his ministry;

The baleful boughs hang o’er her,

The poison-dews descend.

What power will now restore her,

What God will be her friend?



2.



Bright and so beautiful was that fair night,

It might have calm’d the gay amid their mirth,

And given the wretched a delight in tears.

One of the Glendoveers,

The loveliest race of all of heavenly birth,

Hovering with gentle motion o’er the earth,

Amid the moonlight air,

In sportive flight was floating round and round,

Unknowing where his joyous way was tending.

He saw the maid where motionless she lay,

And stoopt his flight descending,

And rais’d her from the ground.

Her heavy eye-lids are half clos’d,

Her cheeks are pale and livid like the dead,

Down hang her loose arms lifelessly,

Down hangs her languid head.



3.



With timely pity touch’d for one so fair,

The gentle Glendoveer

Prest her thus pale and senseless to his breast,

And springs aloft in air with sinewy wings,

And bears the Maiden there,,

Where Himakoot, the holy Mount, on high

From mid-earth rising in mid-Heaven,

Shines in its glory like the throne of Even.

Soaring with strenuous flight above,

He bears her to the blessed Grove,

Where in his ancient and august abodes,

There dwells old Casyapa, the Sire of Gods.



4.



The Father of the Immortals sate,

Where underneath the Tree of Life

The fountains of the Sacred. River sprung:

The Father of the Immortals smil’d

Benignant on his son.

Knowest thou, he said, my child,

Ereenia, knowest thou whom thou bringest here,

A mortal to the holy atmosphere?



EREENIA.

I found her in the Groves of Earth,

Beneath a poison-tree,

Thus lifeless as thou seest her.

In pity have I brought her to these bowers,

Not erring, Father! by that smile...

By that benignant eye!



CASYAPA.

What if the maid be sinful? If her ways

Were ways of darkness, and her death predoom’d

To that black hour of midnight, when the Moon

Hath turn’d her face away,

Unwilling to behold

The unhappy end of guilt?



EREENIA.

Then what a lie, my Sire, were written here,

In these fair characters! And she had died,

Sure proof of purer life and happier doom,

Now in the moonlight, in the eye of Heaven,

If I had left so fair a flower to fade.

But thou,... all knowing as thou art,

Why askest thou of me?

O Father, oldest, holiest, wisest, best,

To whom all things are plain,

Why askest thou of me?



CASYAPA.

Knowest thou Kehama?



EREENIA.

The Almighty Man!

Who knows not him and his tremendous power?

The Tyrant of the Earth,

The Enemy of Heaven!



CASYAPA.

Fearest thou the Rajah?



EREENIA,

He is terrible!



CASYAPA.

Yea, he is terrible! such power hath he,

That hope hath entered Hell.

The A suras and the spirits of the damn’d

Acclaim their Hero; Yam en, with the might

Of Godhead, scarce can quell

The rebel race accurst;

Half from their beds of torture they uprise,

And half uproot their chains.

Is there not fear in Heaven?

The souls that are in bliss suspend their joy;

The danger hath disturb’d

The calm of Deity,

And Brama fears, and Veeshnoo turns his face

In doubt toward Seeva’s throne.



Ereenia.

I have seen Indra tremble at his prayers,

And at his dreadful penances turn pale.

They claim and wrest from Seeva power so vast,

That even Seeva’s self,

The Highest, cannot grant and be secure.



CASYAPA.

And darest thou, Ereenia, brave

The Almighty Tyrant’s power?



EREENIA.

I brave him, Father! I?



CASYAPA.

Darest thou brave his vengeance?... for if not,

Take her again to earth,

Cast her before the tyger in his path,

Or where the death-dew-dropping tree

May work Kehama’s will.



EREENIA.

Never I



CASYAPA.

Then meet his wrath! for he, even he,

Hath set upon this worm his wanton foot



EREENIA.

I knew her not, how wretched and how fair,

When here I wafted her:... poor Child of Earth,

Shall I forsake thee, seeing thee so fair,

So wretched? O my Father, let the maid

Dwell in the Sacred Grove.



CASYAPA.

That must not be,

For Force and Evil then would enter here;

Ganges, the holy stream which cleanseth sin,

Would flow from hence polluted in its springs,

And they who gasp upon its banks in death,

Feel no salvation. Piety and peace

And Wisdom, these are mine; but not the power

Which could protect her from the Almighty Man;

Nor when the spirit of dead Arvalan

Should persecute her here to glut his rage,

To heap upon her yet more agony,

And ripen more damnation for himself.



EREENIA.

Dead Arvalan?



CASYAPA.

All power to him, whereof

The disembodied spirit in its state

Of weakness could be made participant,

Kehama hath assign’d, until his days

Of wandering shall be numbered.



EREENIA.

Look! she drinks

The gale of healing from the blessed Groves.

She stirs, and lo! her hand

Hath touch’d the Holy River in its source,

Who would have shrunk if aught impure were nigh.



CASYAPA.

The Maiden, of a truth, is pure from sin.



5.



The waters of the holy Spring

About the hand of Kailyal play;

They rise, they sparkle, and they sing.

Leaping where languidly she lay,

As if with that rejoicing stir

The holy Spring would welcome her.

The Tree of Life which o’er her spread,

Benignant bow’d its sacred head,

And dropt its dews of healing;

And her heart-blood at every breath,

Recovering from the strife of death,

Drew in new strength and feeling.

Behold her beautiful in her repose,

A life-bloom reddening now her dark-brown cheek;

And lo! her eyes unclose,

Dark as the depth of Ganges’ spring profound

When night hangs over it,

Bright as the moon’s refulgent beam,

That quivers on its clear up-sparkling stream.



6.



Soon she let fall her lids,

As one who, from a blissful dream

Waking to thoughts of pain,

Fain would return to sleep, and dream again.

Distrustful of the sight,

She moves not, fearing to disturb

The deep and full delight.

In wonder fix’d, opening again her eye

She gazes silently,

Thinking her mortal pilgrimage was past,

That she had reach’d her heavenly home of rest,

And these were Gods before her,

Or spirits of the blest.



7.



Lo! at Ereenia’s voice,

A Ship of Heaven comes sailing down the skies.

Where wouldst thou bear her? cries

The ancient Sire of Gods.

Straight to the Swerga, to my Bower of Bliss,

The Glendoveer replies,

To Indra’s own abodes. — .

Foe of her foe, were it alone for this

Indra should guard her from his vengeance there;

But if the God forbear,

Unwilling yet the perilous strife to try,

Or shrinking from the dreadful Rajah’s might,...

Weak as I am, O Father, even I

Stand forth in Seeva’s sight.



8.



Trust thou in Him whate’er betide,

And stand forth fearlessly!

The Sire of Gods replied:

All that He wills is right, and doubt not thou,

Howe’er our feeble scope of sight

May fail us now,

His righteous will in all things must be done.

My blessing be upon thee, O my son!





VII. THE SWERGA.



1.



Then in the Ship of Heaven, Ereenia laid

The waking, wondering Maid;

The Ship of Heaven, instinct with thought, display’d

Its living sail, and glides along the sky.

On either side in wavy tide,

The clouds of morn along its path divide;

The Winds who swept in wild career on high,

Before its presence check their charmed force;

The Winds that loitering lagg’d along their course,

Around the living Bark enamour’d play,

Swell underneath the sail, and sing before its way.



2.



That Bark, in shape, was like the furrowed shell

Wherein the Sea-Nymphs to their parent-king,

On festal day, their duteous offerings bring.

Its hue?... Go watch the last green light

Ere Evening yields the western sky to Night;

Or fix upon the Sun thy strenuous sight

Till thou hast reach’d its orb of chrysolite.

The sail from end to end display’d

Bent, like a rainbow, o’er the maid.

An Angel’s head, with visual eye,

Through trackless space, directs its chosen way;

Nor aid of wing, nor foot, nor fin,

Requires to voyage o’er the obedient sky.

Smooth as the swan when not a breeze at even

Disturbs the surface of the silver stream,

Through air and sunshine sails the Ship of Heaven.



3.



Recumbent there the Maiden glides along

On her aerial way,

How swift she feels not, though the swiftest wind

Had flagg’d in flight behind.

Motionless as a sleeping babe she lay,

And all serene in mind,

Feeling no fear; for that etherial air

With such new life and joyance fill’d her heart,

Fear could not enter there;

For sure she deem’d her mortal part was o’er,

And she was sailing to the heavenly shore;

And that Angelic form, who mov’d beside,

Was some good Spirit sent to be her guide.



4.



Daughter of Earth! therein thou deem’st aright.

And never yet did form more beautiful,

In dreams of night descending from on high,

Bless the religious Virgin’s gifted sight;

Nor, like a vision of delight,

Rise on the raptur’d Poet’s inward eye.

Of human form divine was he,

The immortal Youth of Heaven who floated by;

Even such’ as that divinest form shall be

In those blest stages of our onward race,

When no infirmity,

Low thought, nor base desire, nor wasting care,

Deface the semblance of our heavenly sire.

The wings of Eagle or of Cherubim

Had seem’d unworthy him:

Angelic power and dignity and grace

Were in his glorious pennons; from the neck

Down to the ankle reach’d their swelling web,

Richer than robes of Tyrian die, that deck

Imperial majesty:

Their colour like the winter’s moonless sky

When all the stars of midnight’s canopy

Shine forth; or like the azure deep at noon,

Reflecting back to heaven a brighter blue.

Such was their tint when clos’d, but when outspread,

The permeating light

Shed through their substance thin a varying hue;

Now bright as when the Rose,.

Beauteous as fragrant, gives to scent and sight

A like delight; now like the juice that flows

From Douro’s generous vine,

Or ruby when with deepest red it glows;

Or as the morning clouds refulgent shine

When, at forthcoming of the Lord of Day,

The Orient, like a shrine,

Kindles as it receives the rising ray,

And heralding his way,

Proclaims the presence of the power divine.



5.



Thus glorious were the wings

Of that celestial Spirit, as he went

Disporting through his native element.

Nor these alone

The gorgeous beauties that they gave to view:

Through the broad membrane branch’d a pliant bone

Spreading like fibres from their parent stem,

Its veins like interwoven silver shone,

Or as the chaster hue

Of pearls that grace some Sultan’s diadem.

Now with slow stroke and strong, behold him smite

The buoyant air, and now in gentler flight,

On motionless wing expanded, shoot along.



6.



Through air and sunshine sails the Ship of Heaven.

Far far beneath them lies

The gross and heavy atmosphere of earth;

And with the Swerga gales,

The Maid of mortal birth

At every breath a new delight inhales.

And now toward its port the Ship of Heaven,

Swift as a falling meteor, shapes its flight,

Yet gently as the dews of night that gem,

And do not bend the hare-bell’s slenderest stem.

Daughter of Earth, Ereenia cried, alight,

This is thy place of rest, the Swerga this,

Lo, here my Bower of Bliss!



7.



He furl’d his azure wings, which round him fold

Graceful as robes of Grecian chief of old.

The happy Kailyal knew not where to gaze:

Her eyes around in joyful wonder roam,

Now turn’d upon the lovely Glendoveer,

Now on his heavenly home.



EREENIA.

Here, Maiden, rest in peace,

And I will guard thee, feeble as I am.

The Almighty Rajah shall not harm thee here,

While Indra keeps his throne.



KAILYAL.

Alas, thou fearest him!

Immortal as thou art, thou fearest him!

I thought that death had sav’d me from his power;

Not even the dead are safe.



EREENIA.

Long years of life and happiness,

O Child of Earth, be thine!

From death I sav’d thee, and from all thy foes

Will save thee, while the Swerga is secure.



KAILYAL.

Not me alone, O gentle Deveta!

I have a father suffering upon earth,

A persecuted, wretched, poor, good man,

For whose strange misery

There is no human help,

And none but I dare comfort him

Beneath Kehama’s curse.

O gentle Deveta, protect him too!



EREENIA.

Come, plead thyself to Indra! words like thine

May win their purpose, rouse his slumbering heart,

And make him yet put forth his arm to wield

The thunder, while the thunder is his own.



8.



Then to the garden of the Deity

Ereenia led the maid.

In the mid garden tower’d a giant Tree;

Rock-rooted on a mountain-top, it grew,

Rear’d its unrivall’d head on high,

And stretch’d a thousand branches o’er the sky,

Drinking with all its leaves celestial dew.

Lo! where from thence as from a living well

A thousand torrents flow!

For still in one perpetual shower,

Like diamond drops, etherial waters fell

From every leaf of all its ample bower.

Rolling adown the steep

From that aerial height,

Through the deep shade of aromatic trees,

Half-seen, the cataracts shoot their gleams of light,

And pour upon the breeze

Their thousand voices; far away the roar,

In modulations of delightful sound,

Half-heard and ever varying, floats around.

Below, an ample Lake expanded lies,

Blue as the o’er-arching skies;

Forth issuing from that lovely Lake,

A thousand rivers water Paradise.

Full to the brink, yet never overflowing,

They cool the amorous gales, which, ever blowing,

O’er their melodious surface love to stray;

Then winging back their way,

Their vapours to the parent Tree repay;

And ending thus where they began,

And feeding thus the source from whence they came,

The eternal rivers of the Swerga ran,

For ever renovate, yet still the same.



9.



On that etherial Lake whose waters lie

Blue and transpicuous, like another sky,

The Elements had rear’d their King’s abode.

A strong controuling power their strife suspended,

And there their hostile essences they blended,

To form a Palace worthy of the God.

Built on the Lake the waters were its floor;

And here its walls were water arch’d with fire,

And here were fire with water vaulted o’er;

And spires and pinnacles of fire

Round watery cupolas aspire,

And domes of rainbow rest on fiery towers;

And roofs of flame are turreted around

With cloud, and shafts of cloud with flame are bound.

Here, too, the Elements for ever veer,

Ranging around with endless interchanging;

Pursued in love, and so in love pursuing,

In endless revolutions here they roll;

For ever their mysterious work renewing,

The parts all shifting, still unchanged the whole.

Even we on earth, at intervals, descry

Gleams of the glory, streaks of flowing light,

Openings of heaven, and streams that flash at night

In fitful splendour, through the northern sky.



10.



Impatient of delay, Ereenia caught

The Maid aloft, and spread his wings abroad,

And bore her to the presence of the God.

There Indra sate upon his throne reclin’d,

Where Devetas adore him;

The lute of Nared, warbling on the wind,

All tones of magic harmony combin’d

To sooth his troubled mind,

While the dark-eyed Apsaras danced before him.

In vain the God-musician played,

In vain the dark-eyed Nymphs of Heaven essay’d

To charm him with their beauties in the dance;

And when he saw the mortal Maid appear,

Led by the heroic Glendoveer,

A deeper trouble fill’d his countenance.

What hast thou done, Ereenia, said the God,

Bringing a mortal here?

And while he spake his eye was on the Maid.

The look he gave was solemn, not severe;

No hope to Kailyal it convey’d,

And yet it struck no fear;

There was a sad displeasure in his air,

But pity, too, was there.



EREENIA.

Hear me, O lndra! On the lower earth

I found this child of man, by what mishap

I know not, lying in the lap of death.

Aloft I bore her to our Father’s grove;

Not having other thought, than when the gales

Of bliss had heal’d her, upon earth again

To leave its lovely daughter. Other thoughts

Arose, when Casyapa declar’d her fate;

For she is one who groans beneath the power

Of the dread Rajah, terrible alike

To men and Gods. His son, dead Arvalan,

Arm’d with a portion, Indra, of thy power

Already wrested from thee, persecutes

The Maid, the helpless one, the innocent.

What then behov’d me but to waft her here

To my own Bower of Bliss? what other choice?

The spirit of foul Arvalan, not yet

Hath power to enter here; here thou art yet

Supreme, and yet the Swerga is thine own.



INDRA.

No child of man, Ereenia, in the Bowers

Of Bliss may sojourn, till he hath put off

His mortal part; for on mortality

Time and Infirmity and Death attend,

Close followers they, and in their mournful train

Sorrow and Pain and Mutability:

Did they find entrance here, we should behold

Our joys, like earthly summers, pass away.

Those joys perchance may pass; a stronger hand

May wrest my sceptre, and unparadise

The Swerga;... but, Ereenia, if we fall,

Let it be Fate’s own arm that casts us down,

We will not rashly hasten and provoke

The blow, nor bring ourselves the ruin on.



EREENIA,

Fear courts the blow, Fear brings the ruin on.

Needs must the chariot-wheels of Destiny

Crush him who throws himself before their track,

Patient and prostrate.



INDRA.

All may yet be well.

Who knows but Veeshnoo will descend, and save,

Once more incarnate?



EREENIA;

Look not there for help,

Nor build on unsubstantial hope thy trust!

Our Father Casyapa hath said he turns

His doubtful eyes to Seeva, even as thou

Dost look to him for aid. But thine own strength

Should for thine own salvation be put forth;

Then might the higher powers approving see

And bless the brave resolve... Oh, that my arm

Could wield yon lightnings which play idly there,

In inoffensive radiance, round thy head!

The Swerga should not need a champion now,

Nor Earth implore deliverance still in vain!



INDRA.

Thinkest thou I want the will? rash Son of Heaven,

What if my arm be feeble as thine own

Against the dread Kehama? He went on

Conquering in irresistible career,

Till his triumphant car had measur’d o’er

The insufficient earth, and all the kings

Of men received his yoke; then had he won

His will, to ride upon their necks elate,

And crown his conquests with the sacrifice

That should, to men and gods, proclaim him Lord

And Sovereign Master of the vassal World,

Sole Rajah, the Omnipotent below.

The steam of that portentous sacrifice

Arose to Heaven. Then was the hour to strike.

Then in the consummation of his pride,

His height of glory, then the thunder-bolt

Should have gone forth, and hurl’d him from his throne

Down to the fiery floor of Padalon,

To everlasting burnings, agony

Eternal, and remorse which knows no end.

That hour went by: grown impious in success,

By prayer and penances he wrested now

Such power from Fate, that soon, if Seeva turn not

His eyes on earth, and no Avatar save,

Soon will he seize the Swerga for his own,

Roll on through Padalon his chariot wheels,

Tear up the adamantine bolts which lock

The accurst Asuras to its burning floor,

And force the drink of Immortality

From Yamen’s charge...Vain were it now to strive;

My thunder cannot pierce the sphere of power

Wherewith, as with a girdle, he is bound.



KAILYAL.

Take me to earth, O gentle Deveta!

Take me again to earth 1 This is no place

Of hope for me!... my Father still must bear

His curse... he shall not bear it all alone;

Take me to earth, that 1 may follow him!...

I do not fear the Almighty Man! the Gods

Are feeble here; but there are higher powers

Who will not turn their eyes from wrongs like ours;

Take me to earth, O gentle Deveta!...



11.



Saying thus she knelt, and to his knees she clung,

And bow’d her head, in tears and silence praying.

Rising anon, around his neck she flung

Her arms, and there with folded hands she hung,

And fixing on the guardian Glendoveer

Her eyes, more eloquent than Angel’s tongue,

Again she cried, There is no comfort here!

I must be with my Father in his pain...

Take me to earth, O Deveta, again!



12.



Indra with admiration heard the maid.

O Child of Earth, he cried,

Already in thy spirit thus divine,

Whatever weal or woe betide,

Be that high sense of duty still thy guide,

And all good Powers will aid a soul like thine.

Then turning to Ereenia, thus he said,

Take her where Ganges hath its second birth,

Below our sphere; and yet above the earth:

There may Ladurlad rest beyond the power

Of the dread Rajah, till the fated hour.





VIII. THE SACRIFICE.



1.



Dost thou tremble, O Indra, O God of the Sky,

Why slumber those thunders of thine

Dost thou tremble on high,...

Wilt thou tamely the Swerga resign,...

Art thou smitten, O Indra, with dread?

Or seest thou not, seest thou not, Monarch divine,

How many a day to Seeva’s shrine

Kehama his victim hath led?

Nine and ninety days are fled,

Nine and ninety steeds have bled;

One more, the rite will be complete,

One victim more, and this the dreadful day!

Then will the impious Rajah seize thy seat,

And wrest the thunder-sceptre from thy sway.

Along the mead the hallowed steed

Yet bends at liberty his way;

At noon his consummating blood will flow.

O day of woe! above, below,

That blood confirms the Almighty Tyrant’s reign!

Thou tremblest, O Indra, O God of the Sky,

Thy thunder is vain!

Thou tremblest on high for thy power!

But where is Veeshnoo at this hour?

But where is Seeva’s eye?

Is the Destroyer blind?

Is the Preserver careless for mankind?



2.



Along the mead the hallowed Steed

Still wanders wheresoe’er he will,

O’er hill, or dale, or plain;

No human hand hath trick’d that mane

From which he shakes the morning dew;

His mouth has never felt the rein,

His lips have never froth’d the chain;

For pure of blemish and of stain,.

His neck unbroke to mortal yoke,

Like Nature free the Steed must be,

Fit offering for the Immortals he.

A year and day the Steed must stray

Wherever chance may guide his way,

Before he fall at Seeva’s shrine;

The year and day have past away,

Nor touch of man hath marr’d the rite divine.

And now at noon the Steed must bleed;

The perfect rite to-day must force the meed

Which Fate reluctant shudders to bestow;

Then must the Swerga-God

Yield to the Tyrant of the World below;

Then must the Devetas obey

The Rajah’s rod, and groan beneath his hateful sway.



3.



The Sun rides high; the hour is nigh;

The multitude who long,

Lest aught should mar the rite,

In circle wide on every side,

Have kept the Steed in sight,

Contract their circle now, and drive him on.

Drawn in long files before the Temple-court,

The Rajah’s archers flank an ample space;

Here, moving onward still, they drive him near,

Then, opening, give him way to enter here.



4.



Behold him, how he starts and flings his head!

On either side in glittering order spread,

The archers ranged in narrowing lines appear;

The multitude behind close up the rear

With moon-like bend, and silently await

The awful end,

The rite that shall from Indra wrest his power.

In front, with far-stretch’d walls, and many a tower

Turret and dome and pinnacle elate,

The huge Pagoda seems to load the land:

And there before the gate

The Bramin band expectant stand,

The axe is ready for Kehama’s hand.



5.



Hark! at the Golden Palaces

The Bramin strikes the time!

One, two, three, four, a thrice-told chime,

And then again, one, two.

The bowl that in its vessel floats, anew

Must fill and sink again,

Then will the final stroke be due.

The Sun rides high, the noon is nigh,

And silently, as if spell-bound,

The multitude expect the sound.



6.



Lo! how the Steed, with sudden start,

Turns his quick head to every part;

Long files of men on every side appear.

The sight might well his heart affright.

And yet the silence that is here

Inspires a stranger fear;

For not a murmur, not a sound

Of breath or motion rises round,

No stir is heard in all that mighty crowd;

He neighs, and from the temple -wall

The voice re-echoes loud,

Loud and distinct, as from a hill

Across a lonely vale, when all is still,

Within the temple, on his golden throne

Reclin’d, Kehama lies,

Watching with steady eyes

The perfum’d light that, burning bright,

Metes out the passing hours.

On either hand his eunuchs stand,

Freshening with fans of peacock-plumes the air,

Which, redolent of all rich gums and flowers,

Seems, overcharged with sweets, to stagnate there.

Lo! the time-taper’s flame ascending slow

Creeps up its coil toward the fated line;

Kehama rises and goes forth,

And from the altar, ready where it lies,

He takes the axe of sacrifice.-



8.



That instant from the crowd, with sudden shout,

A man sprang out

To lay upon the Steed his hand profane.

A thousand archers, with unerring eye,

At once let fly,

And with their hurtling arrows fill the sky.

In vain they fall upon him fast as rain;

He bears a charmed life, which may defy

All weapons,... and the darts that whizz around,

As from an adamantine panoply

Repell’d, fall idly to the ground.

Kehama clasp’d his hands in agony,

And saw him grasp the hallowed courser’s mane,

Spring up with sudden bound,

And with a frantic cry,

And madman’s gesture, gallop round and round.



9.



They seize, they drag him to the Rajah’s feet.

What doom will now be his,.. what vengeance meet

Will he, who knows no mercy, now require?

The obsequious guards around, with blood-hound eye,

Look for the word, in slow-consuming fire,

By piece-meal death, to make the wretch expire,

Or hoist his living carcase, hook’d on high,

To feed the fowls and insects of the sky;

Or if aught worse inventive cruelty

To that remorseless heart of royalty

Might prompt, accursed instruments they stand

To work the wicked will with wicked hand.

Far other thoughts were in the multitude;

Pity, and human feelings, held them still;

And stifled sighs and groans supprest were there,

And many a secret curse and inward prayer

Call’d on the insulted Gods to save mankind.

Expecting some new crime in fear they stood,

Some horror which would make the natural blood

Start, with cold shudderings thrill the sinking heart,

Whiten the lip, and make the abhorrent eye

Roll back and close, prest in for agony.



10.



How then fared he for whom the mighty crowd

Suffered in spirit thus,... how then fared he?

A ghastly smile was on his lip, his eye

Glared with a ghastly hope, as he drew nigh,

And cried aloud, Yes, Rajah! it is I!

And wilt thou kill me now? —

The countenance of the Almighty Man

Fell when he knew Ladurlad, and his brow

Was clouded with despite, as one ashamed.

That wretch again! indignant he exclaim’d,

And smote his forehead, and stood silently

Awhile in wrath: then, with ferocious smile,

And eyes which seem’d to darken his dark cheek,

Let him go free! he cried; he hath his Curse,

And Vengeance upon him can wreak no worse...

But ye who did not seize him... tremble ye!



11.



He bade the archers pile their weapons there r

No manly courage fill’d the slavish band,

No sweetening vengeance rous’d a brave despair.

He call’d his horsemen then, and gave command

To hem the offenders in, and hew them down.

Ten thousand scymitars at once uprear’d,

Flash up, like waters sparkling to the sun;

A second time the fatal brands appear’d

Lifted aloft,... they glitter’d then no more,

Their light was gone, their splendour quench’d in gore.

At noon the massacre begun,

And night clos’d in before the work of death was done.





IX. THE HOME-SCENE.



1.



The steam of slaughter from that place of blood

Spread o’er the tainted sky.

Vultures, for whom the Rajah’s tyranny

So oft had furnish’d food, from far and nigh

Sped to the lure: aloft with joyful cry,

Wheeling around, they hover’d over head;

Or, on the temple perch’d, with greedy eye,

Impatient watch’d the dead.

Far off the tygers, in the inmost wood,

Heard the death-shriek, and snuff’d the scent of blood.

They rose, and through the covert went their way,

Couch’d at the forest edge, and waited for their prey.



2.



He who had sought for death went wandering on,

The hope which had inspir’d his heart was gone,

Yet a wild joyance still inflam’d his face,

A smile of vengeance, a triumphant glow.

Where goes he?... Whither should Ladurlad go!

Unwittingly the wretch’s footsteps trace

Their wonted path toward his dwelling-place;

And wandering on, unknowing where,

He starts at finding he is there.



3.



Behold his lowly home,

By yonder broad-bough’d plane o’ershaded:

There Marriataly’s image stands,

And there the garland twin’d by Kailyal’s hands

Around its brow hath faded.

The Peacocks, at their master’s sight,

Quick from the leafy thatch alight,

And hurry round, and search the ground,

And veer their glancing necks from side to side,

‘ Expecting from his hand

Their daily dole, which erst the maid supplied,

Now all too long denied.



4.



But as he gaz’d around,

How strange did all accustom’d sights appear!

How differently did each familiar sound

Assail his altered ear!

Here stood the marriage bower,

Rear’d in that happy hour

When he, with festal joy and youthful pride,

Had brought Yedillian home, his beauteous bride.

Leaves not its own, and many a borrowed flower,

Had then bedeck’d it, withering ere the night;

But he who look’d, from that auspicious day,

For years of long delight,

And would not see the marriage-bower decay,

There planted and nurst up, with daily care,

The sweetest herbs that scent the ambient air,

And train’d them round to live and flourish there.

Nor when dread Yamen’s will

Had call’d Yedillian from his arms away,

Ceas’d he to tend the marriage-bower, but still,

Sorrowing, had drest it like a pious rite

Due to the monument of past delight.



5.



He took his wonted seat before the door,...

Even as of yore,

When he was wont to view, with placid eyes,

His daughter at her evening sacrifice.

Here were the flowers which she so carefully

Did love to rear for Marriataly’s brow;

Neglected now,

Their heavy heads were drooping, over-blown:

All else appeared the same as heretofore,

All... save himself alone; —

How happy then,... and now a wretch for evermore!



6.



The market-flag which hoisted high,

From far and nigh,

Above yon cocoa grove is seen,

Hangs motionless amid the sultry sky.

Loud sounds the village-drum: a happy crowd

Is there; Ladurlad hears their distant voices,

But with their joy no more his heart rejoices;

And how their old companion now may fare,

Little they know, and less they care.

The torment he is doom’d to bear.

Was but to them the wonder of a day,

A burthen of sad thoughts soon put away.



7.



They knew not that the wretched man was near,

And yet it seem’d, to his distemper’d ear,

As if they wrong’d him with their merriment.

Resentfully he turn’d away his eyes,

Yet turn’d them but to find

Sights that enraged his mind

With envious grief more wild and overpowering.

The tank which fed his fields was there, and there

The large-leav’d lotus on the waters flowering.

There, from the intolerable heat,

The buffaloes retreat;

Only their nostrils rais’d to meet the air,

Amid the sheltering element they rest.

Impatient of the sight, he clos’d his eyes,

And bow’d his burning head, and in despair

Calling on Indra,...Thunder-God! he said,

Thou owest to me alone this day thy throne,

Be grateful, and in mercy strike me dead!



8.



Despair had rous’d him to that hopeless prayer,

Yet thinking on the heavenly Powers, his mind

Drew comfort; and he rose and gather’d flowers,

And twin’d a crown for Marriataly’s brow;

And taking then her wither’d garland down,

Replaced it with the blooming coronal.

Not for myself, the unhappy Father cried,

Not for myself, O mighty one! I pray,

Accursed as I am beyond thy aid!

But, oh! be gracious still to that dear Maid

Who crown’d thee with these garlands day by day,

And danced before thee aye at even-tide

In beauty and in pride.

O Marriataly, wheresoe’er she stray

Forlorn and wretched, still be thou her guide!



9.



A loud and fiendish laugh replied,

Scoffing his prayer. Aloft, as from the air,

The sound of insult came: he look’d, and there

The visage of dead Arvalan came forth,

Only his face amid the clear blue sky,

With long-drawn lips of insolent mockery,

And eyes whose lurid glare

Was like a sulphur fire,

Mingling with darkness ere its flames expire.



10.



Ladurlad knew him well: enraged to see

The cause of all his misery,

He stoop’d and lifted from the ground

A stake, whose fatal point was black with blood;

The same wherewith his hand had dealt the wound,

When Arvalan, in hour with evil fraught,

For violation seiz’d the shrieking Maid.

Thus arm’d, in act again to strike he stood,

And twice with inefficient wrath essay’d

To smite the impassive shade.

The lips of scorn their mockery-laugh renew’d,

And Arvalan put forth a hand and caught

The sun-beam, and condensing there its light,

Upon Ladurlad turn’d the burning stream.

Vain cruelty! the stake

Fell in white ashes from his hold, but he

Endur’d no added pain; his agony

Was full, and at the height;

The burning stream of radiance nothing harm’d him:

A fire was in his heart and brain,

And from all other flame

Kehama’s Curse had charm’d him.



11.



Anon the Spirit wav’d a second hand;

Down rush’d the obedient whirlwind from the sky;

Scoop’d up the sand like smoke, and from on high

Shed the hot shower upon Ladurlad’s head.

Where’er he turns, the accursed Hand is there;

East, West, and North and South, on every side

The Hand accursed waves in air to guide

The dizzying storm; ears, nostrils, eyes and mouth,

It fills and choaks, and, clogging every pore,

Taught him new torments might be yet in store.

Where shall he turn to fly? behold his house

In flames; uprooted lies the marriage-bower,

The Goddess buried by the sandy shower,

Blindly, with staggering step, he reels about,

And still the accursed Hand pursued,

And still the lips of scorn their mockery laugh renew’d.



12.



What, Arvalan! hast thou so soon forgot

The grasp of Pollear? Wilt thou still defy

The righteous Powers of Heaven? or know’st thou not

That there are yet superior Powers on high,

Son of the Wicked?... Lo, in rapid flight,

Ereenia hastens from the etherial height;

Bright is the sword celestial in his hand,

Like lightning in its path athwart the sky.

He comes and drives, with angel-arm, the blow.

Oft have the Asuras, in the wars of Heaven,

Felt that keen sword by arm angelic driven,

And fled before it from the fields of light.

Thrice through the vulnerable shade

The Glendoveer impels the griding blade.

The wicked Shade flies howling from his foe.

So let that spirit foul

Fly, and for impotence of anger, howl,

Writhing with pain, and o’er his wounds deplore;

Worse punishment hath Arvalan deserv’d,

And righteous Fate hath heavier doom in store.



13.



Not now the Glendoveer pursued his flight.

He bade the Ship of Heaven alight,

And gently there he laid

The astonished Father by the happy Maid,

The Maid now shedding tears of deep delight.

Beholding all things with incredulous eyes,

Still dizzy with the sand-storm, there he lay,

While sailing up the skies, the living Bark,

Through air and sunshine, held its heavenly way.





X. MOUNT MERU.



1.



Swift through the sky the vessel of the Suras

Sails up the fields of ether like an Angel.

Rich is the freight, O Vessel, that thou bearest!

Beauty and Virtue,

Fatherly cares and filial veneration,

Hearts which are prov’d and strengthen’d by affliction,

Manly resentment, fortitude and action,

Womanly goodness;....

All with which Nature halloweth her daughters,

Tenderness, truth and purity and meekness,

Piety, patience, faith and resignation,

Love and devotement.

Ship of the Gods! how richly art thou laden!

Proud of the charge, thou voyagest rejoicing.

Clouds float around to honour thee, and Evening

Lingers in heaven.



2.



A Stream descends on Meru mountain;

None hath seen its secret fountain;

It had its birth, so sages say,

Upon the memorable day

When Parvati presumed to lay,

In wanton play,

Her hands, too venturous Goddess in her mirth,

On Seeva’s eyes, the light and life of Earth.

Thereat the heart of the Universe stood still;

The Elements ceas’d their influences; the Hours

Stopt on the eternal round; Motion and Breath,

Time, Change, and Life and Death,

In sudden trance opprest, forgot their powers.

A moment, and the dread eclipse was ended;

But at the thought of Nature thus suspended,

The sweat on Seeva’s forehead stood,

And Ganges thence upon the World descended,

The Holy River, the Redeeming Flood.



3.



None hath seen its secret fountain;

But on the top of Meru mountain,

Which rises o’er the hills of earth,

In light and clouds it hath its mortal birth.

Earth seems that pinnacle to rear

Sublime above this worldly sphere,

Its cradle, and its altar, and its throne;

And there the new-born River lies

Outspread beneath its native skies,

As if it there would love to dwell

Alone and unapproachable.

Soon flowing forward, and resign’d

To the will of the Creating Mind,

It springs at once, with sudden leap,

Down from the immeasurable steep.

From rock to rock, with shivering force rebounding,

The mighty cataract rushes; Heaven around,

Like thunder, with the incessant roar resounding,

And Meru’s summit shaking with the sound.

Wide spreads the snowy foam, the sparkling spray

Dances aloft; and ever there, at morning,

The earliest sun-beams haste to wing their way,

With rain-bow wreaths the holy flood adorning;

And duly the adoring Moon at night

Sheds her white glory there,

And in the watery air

Suspends her halo-crowns of silver light,



4.



A mountain-valley in its blessed breast

Receives the stream, which there delights to lie,

Untroubled and at rest,

Beneath the untainted sky.

There in a lovely lake it seems to sleep,

And thence, through many a channel dark and deep,

Their secret way the holy Waters wind,

Till, rising underneath the root

Of the Tree of Life on Himakoot,

Majestic forth they flow to purify mankind.



5.



Toward this Lake, above the nether sphere,

The living Bark, with angel eye,

Directs its course along the obedient sky.

Kehama hath not yet dominion here;

And till the dreaded hour,

When Indra by the Rajah shall be driven

Dethron’d from Heaven,

Here may Ladurlad rest beyond his power.

The living Bark alights; the Glendoveer

Then lays Ladurlad by the blessed Lake;...

O happy Sire, and yet more happy Daughter!

The etherial gales his agony aslake,

His daughter’s tears are on his cheek,

His hand is in the water;

The innocent man, the man opprest,

Oh joy!... hath found a place of rest

Beyond Kehama’s sway,

His curse extends not here; his pains have past away.



6.



O happy Sire, and happy Daughter!

Ye on the banks of that celestial water

Your resting place and sanctuary have found.

What! hath not then their mortal taint defil’d

The sacred solitary ground?

Vain thought!... the Holy Valley smil’d

Receiving such a sire and child;

Ganges, who seem’d asleep to lie,

Beheld them with benignant eye,

And rippled round melodiously,

And roll’d her little waves, to meet

And welcome their beloved feet.

The gales of Swerga thither fled,

And heavenly odours there were shed

About, below, and overhead;

And Earth, rejoicing in their tread,

Hath built them up a blooming Bower,

Where every amaranthine flower

Its deathless blossom interweaves

With bright and undecaying leaves.



7.



Three happy beings are there here,

The Sire, the Maid, the Glendoveer.

A fourth approaches,...who is this

That enters in the Bower of Bliss?

No form so fair might painter find

Among the daughters of mankind;

For death her beauties hath refin’d,

And unto her a form hath given,

Fram’d of the elements of Heaven;

Pure dwelling-place for perfect mind.

She stood and gaz’d on sire and child;

Her tongue not yet had power to speak,

The tears were streaming down her cheek

And when those tears her sight beguil’d,

And still her faultering accents fail’d,

The Spirit, mute and motionless,

Spread out her arms for the caress,

Made still and silent with excess

Of love and painful happiness.



8.



The Maid that lovely form survey’d;

Wistful she gaz’d, and knew her not;

But Nature to her heart convey’d

A sudden thrill, a startling thought,

A feeling many a year forgot,

Now like a dream anew recurring,

As if again in every vein

Her mother’s milk was stirring.

With straining neck and earnest eye

She stretch’d her hands imploringly,

As if she fain would have her nigh,

Yet fear’d to meet the wish’d embrace,

At once with love and awe opprest,

Not so, Ladurlad; he could trace,

Though brighten’d with angelic grace,

His own Yedillian’s earthly face;

He ran and held her to his breast!

Oh joy above all joys of Heaven,

By Death alone to others given,

This moment hath to him restor’d

The early-lost, the long-deplor’d.



9.



They sin who tell us love can die.

With life all other passions fly,

All others are but vanity.

In Heaven Ambition cannot dwell,

Nor Avarice in the vaults of Hell;

Earthly these passions of the Earth,

They perish where they have their birth;

But Love is indestructible.

Its holy flame for ever burneth,

From Heaven it came, to Heaven returneth

Too oft on Earth a troubled guest,

At times deceiv’d, at times opprest,

It here is tried and purified,

Then hath in Heaven its perfect rest:

It soweth here with toil and care,

But the harvest-time of Love is there.

Oh! when a Mother meets on high

The Babe she lost in infancy,

Hath she not then, for pains and fears,

The day of woe, the watchful night,

For all her sorrow, all her tears,

An over-payment of delight!



10.



A blessed family is this

Assembled in the Bower of Bliss!

Strange woe, Ladurlad, hath been thine,

And pangs beyond all human measure,

And thy reward is now divine,

A foretaste of eternal pleasure.

He knew indeed there was a day

When all these joys would pass away,

And he must quit this blest abode;

And, taking up again the spell,

Groan underneath the baleful load,

And wander o’er the world again

Most wretched of the sons of men:

Yet was this brief repose, as when

A traveller in the Arabian sands,

Half-fainting on his sultry road,

Hath reach’d the water-place at last;

And resting there beside the Well,

Thinks of the perils he has past,

And gazes o’er the unbounded plain,

The plain which must be travers’d still,

And drinks,.. yet cannot drink his fill;

Then girds his patient loins again.

So to Ladurlad now was given

New strength, and confidence in Heaven,

And hope, and faith invincible.

For often would Ereenia tell

Of what in elder days befell,

When other Tyrants, in their might,

Usurp’d dominion o’er the earth;

And Veeshnoo took a human birth,

Deliverer of the Sons of men;

And slew the huge Ermaccasen,

And piece-meal rent, with lion force,

Errenen’s accursed corse,

And humbled Baly in his pride

And when the Giant Ravanen

Had borne triumphant, from his side,

Sita, the earth-born God’s beloved bride,

Then, from his island-kingdom, laugh’d to scorn

The insulted husband, and his power defied;

How to revenge the wrong in wrath he hied,

Bridging the sea before his dreadful way,

And met the hundred-headed foe,

And dealt him the unerring blow;

By Brama’s hand the righteous lance was given,

And by that arm immortal driven,

It laid the mighty Tyrant low;

And Earth and Ocean, and high Heaven,

Rejoiced to see his overthrow.

Oh! doubt not thou, Yedillian cried,

Such fate Kehama will betide;

For there are Gods who look below....

Seeva, the Avenger, is not blind,

Nor Veeshnoo careless for mankind.



11.



Thus was Ladurlad’s soul imbued

With hope and holy fortitude;

And Child and Sire, with pious mind

Alike resolv’d, alike resign’d,

Look’d onward to the evil day:

Faith was their comfort, Faith their stay;

They trusted woe would pass away,

And Tyranny would sink subdued,

And Evil yield to Good.



12.



Lovely wert thou, O Flower of Earth!

Above all flowers of mortal birth;

But foster’d in this blissful bower

From day to day, and hour to hour,

Lovelier grew the lovely flower,

O blessed, blessed company!



When men and heavenly spirits greet,

And they whom Death had severed meet,

And hold again communion sweet;...

O blessed, blessed company!

The Sun, careering round the sky,

Beheld them with rejoicing eye,

And bade his willing Charioteer

Relax their speed as they drew near;

Arounin check’d the rainbow reins,

The seven green coursers shook their manes,

And brighter rays around them threw;

The Car of glory in their view

More radiant, more resplendent grew;

And Surya, through his veil of light,

Beheld the Bower, and blest the sight.

The Lord of Night, as he sail’d by,

Stay’d his pearly boat on high;

And, while around the blissful Bower

He bade the softest moonlight flow,

Lingered to see that earthly flower,

Forgetful of his dragon foe,

Who, mindful of their ancient feud,

With open jaws of rage pursued.

There all good Spirits of the air,

Suras and Devetas repair,

Aloft they love to hover there

And view the flower of mortal birth,

Here, for her innocence and worth,

Transplanted from the fields of earth;...

And him who, on the dreadful day

When Heaven was fill’d with consternation,

And Indra trembled with dismay,

And, for the sounds of joy and mirth,.

Woe was heard and lamentation,

Defied the Rajah in his pride,

Though all in Heaven and Earth beside

Stood mute in dolorous expectation;

And, rushing forward in that hour,

Saved the Swerga from his power.

Grateful for this they hover nigh;

And bless the blessed company.



13.



One God alone, with wanton eye,

Beheld them in their bower;

O ye, he cried, who have defied

The Rajah, will ye mock my power?

’Twas Camdeo riding on his lory,

’Twas the immortal youth of Love;

If men below and Gods above,

Subject alike, quoth he, have felt these darts,

Shall ye alone, of all in story,

Boast impenetrable hearts?

Hover here, my gentle lory,

Gently hover, while I see

To whom hath Fate decreed the glory,

To the Glendoveer or me.



14.



Then, in the dewy evening sky,

The bird of gorgeous plumery

Pois’d his wings and hover’d nigh;

It chanced at that delightful hour

Kailyal sate before the Bower,

On the green bank with amaranth sweet,

Where Ganges warbled at her feet.

Ereenia there, before the Maid,

His sails of ocean-blue displayed;

And sportive in her sight,

Mov’d slowly o’er the lake with gliding flight;

Anon, with sudden stroke and strong,

In rapid course careering, swept along;

Now shooting downward from his heavenly height,

Plunged in the deep below,

Then rising, soar’d again,

And shook the sparkling waters off like rain,

And hovering o’er the silver surface hung.

At him young Camdeo bent the bow;

With living bees the bow was strung,

The fatal bow of sugar-cane,

And flowers which would inflame the heart

With their petals barb’d the dart.



15.



The shaft, unerringly addrest,

Unerring flew, and smote Ereenia’s breast.

Ah, Wanton! cried the Glendoveer,

Go aim at idler hearts,

Thy skill is baffled here!

A deeper love I bear that Maid divine,

Sprung from a higher will,

A holier power than thine!

A second shaft, while thus Ereenia cried,

Had Camdeo aim’d at Kailyal’s side,

But, lo! the Bees which strung his bow

Broke off, and took their flight.

To that sweet Flower of earth they wing their way,

Around her raven tresses play,

And buzz about her with delight,

As if, with that melodious sound,

They strove to pay their willing duty

To mortal purity and beauty.

Ah, Wanton! cried the Glendoveer,

No power hast thou for mischief here!

Chuse thou some idler breast,

For these are proof, by nobler thoughts possest.

Go, to thy plains of Matra go,

And string again thy broken bow!



16.



Rightly Ereenia spake; and ill had thoughts

Of earthly love beseem’d the sanctuary

Where Kailyal had been wafted, that the Soul

Of her dead mother there might strengthen her,

Feeding her with the milk of heavenly lore;

And influxes of Heaven imbue her heart

With hope and faith, and holy fortitude,

Against the evil day. Here rest a while

In peace, O Father! mark’d for misery

Above all sons of men; O Daughter! doom’d.

For sufferings and for trials above all

Of women;... yet both favour’d, both belov’d

By all good Powers, here rest a while in peace.





XI. THE ENCHANTRESS.



1.



When from the sword, by arm angelic driven,

Foul Arvalan fled howling, wild in pain,

His thin essential spirit, rent and riven

With wounds, united soon and heal’d again;

Backward the accursed turn’d his eye in flight,

Remindful of revengeful thoughts even then,

And saw where, gliding through the evening light,

The Ship of Heaven sail’d upward through the sky,

Then, like a meteor, vanish’d from his sight.

Where should he follow? vainly might he try

To trace through trackless air its rapid course;

Nor dar’d he that angelic arm defy,

Still sore and writhing from its dreaded force.



2.



Should he the lust of vengeance lay aside?

Too long had Arvalan in ill been train’d;

Nurst up in power and tyranny and pride,

His soul the ignominious thought disdain’d.

Or to his mighty father should he go,

Complaining of defeature twice sustain’d,

And ask new powers to meet the immortal foe?...

Repulse he fear’d not, but he fear’d rebuke,

And sham’d to tell him of his overthrow.

There dwelt a dread Enchantress in a nook

Obscure; old help-mate she to him had been,

Lending her aid in many a secret sin;

And there, for counsel, now his way he took.



3.



She was a woman whose unlovely youth,

Even like a cankered rose, which none will cull,

Had withered on the stalk; her heart was full

Of passions which had found no natural scope,

Feelings which there had grown but ripened not;

Desires unsatisfied, abortive hope,

Repinings which provoked vindictive thought,

These restless elements for ever wrought,

Fermenting in her with perpetual stir,

And thus her spirit to all evil mov’d;

She hated men because they lov’d not her,

And hated women because they were lov’d.

And thus, in wrath and hatred and despair,

She tempted Hell to tempt her; and resign’d

Her body to the Demons of the Air,

Wicked and wanton fiends who, where they will,

Wander abroad, still seeking to do ill,

And take whatever vacant form they find,

Carcase of man or beast, that life hath left;

Foul instrument for them of fouler mind.

To these the Witch her wretched body gave,

So they would wreak her vengeance, on mankind,,

She thus at once their mistress and their slave;

And they, to do such service nothing loth,

Obeyed her bidding, slaves and masters both.



4.



So, from this cursed intercourse she caught

Contagious power of mischief, and was taught

Such secrets as are damnable to guess.

Is there a child whose little lovely ways

Might with all hearts,... on whom his parents gaze

Till they shed tears of joy and tenderness?

Oh! hide him from that Witch’s withering sight!

Oh! hide him from the eye of Lorrinite!

Her look hath crippling in it, and her curse

All plagues which on mortality can light;

Death is his doom if she behold,... or worse,...

Diseases loathsome and incurable,

And inward sufferings that no tongue can tell.

Woe was to him, on whom that eye of hate

Was bent; for, certain as the stroke of Fate,

It did its mortal wort; nor human arts

Could save the unhappy wretch, her chosen prey;

For gazing, she consum’d his vital parts,

Eating his very core of life away.

The wine which from yon wounded palm on high

Fills yonder gourd, as slowly it distills,

Grows sour at once if Lorrinite pass by.

The deadliest worm, from which, all creatures fly,

Fled from the deadlier venom of her eye;

The babe unborn, within its mother’s womb,

Started and trembled when the Witch came nigh,

And in the silent chambers of the tomb

Death shuddered her unholy tread to hear,

And, from the dry and mouldering bones, did fear

Force a cold sweat, when Lorrinite was near.



5.



Power made her haughty: by ambition fir’d,

Ere long to mightier mischiefs she aspir’d.

The Calis, who o’er Cities rule unseen,

Each in her own domain a Demon Queen,

And there ador’d with blood and human life,

They knew her, and in their accurst employ

She stirr’d up neighbouring states to mortal strife.

Sani, the dreadful God, who rides abroad

Upon the King of the Ravens, to destroy

The offending sons of men, when his four hands

Were weary with their toil, would let her do

His work of vengeance upon guilty lands;

And Lorrinite, at his commandment, knew

When the ripe earthquake should be loos’d, and where

To point its course. And in the baneful air

The pregnant seeds of death he bade her strew,

All deadly plagues and pestilence to brew.

The Locusts were her army, and their bands,

Where’er she turn’d her skinny finger, flew;

The floods in ruin roll’d at her commands;

And when, in time of drought, the husbandman

Beheld the gathered rain about to fall,

Her breath would drive it to the desert sands.

While in the marshes parch’d and gaping soil,

The rice-roots by the searching Sun were dried;

And in lean groupes, assembled at the side

Of the empty tank, the cattle dropt and died;

And Famine, at her bidding, wasted wide

The wretched land; till, in the public way,

Promiscuous where the dead and dying lay,

Dogs fed on human bones in the open light of day.



6.



Her secret cell the accursed Arvalan,

In quest of vengeance, sought, and thus began.

Mighty mother! mother wise!

Revenge me on my enemies.



LORRINITE.

Com’st thou, son, for aid to me?

Tell me who have injur’d thee,

Where they are, and who they be;

Of the Earth, or of the Sea,

Or of the aerial company?

Earth, nor Sea, nor Air is free

From the powers who wait on me,

And my tremendous witchery.



ARVALAN.

She for whom so ill I sped,

Whom my Father deemeth dead,

Lives, for Marriataly’s aid

From the water sav’d the maid.

In hatred I desire her still,

And in revenge would have my will.

A Deveta with wings of blue,

And sword whose edge even now I rue,

In a Ship of Heaven on high,

Pilots her along the sky.

Where they voyage thou canst tell,

Mistress of the mighty spell.



7.



At this the Witch, through shrivell’d lips and thin,

Sent forth a sound half-whistle and half-hiss.

Two winged Hands came in,

Armless and bodyless,

Bearing a globe of liquid crystal, set

In frame as diamond bright, yet black as jet.

A thousand eyes were quench’d in endless night,

To form that magic globe; for Lorrinite

Had, from their sockets, drawn the liquid sight,

And kneaded it, with re-creating skill,

Into this organ of her mighty will.

Look in yonder orb, she cried,

Tell me what is there descried.



ARVALAN.

A mountain top, in clouds of light

Envelop’d, rises on my sight;

Thence a cataract rushes down,

Hung with many a rainbow crown;

Light and clouds conceal its head,

Below, a silver Lake is spread;

Upon its shores a Bower I see,

Fit home for blessed company.

See they come forward,... one, two, three,...

The last a Maiden,... it is she!

The foremost shakes his wings of blue,

’Tis he whose sword even yet I rue;

And in that other one I know

The visage of my deadliest foe.

Mother, let thy magic might

Arm me for the mortal fight;

Helm and shield and mail afford,

Proof against his dreaded sword.

Then will I invade their seat,

Then shall vengeance be compleat.



LORRINITE.

Spirits, who obey my will,

Hear him, and his wish fulfill.



8.



So spake the mighty one, nor farther spell

Needed, Anon a sound, like smother’d thunder,

Was heard, slow rolling under;

The solid pavement of the cell

Quak’d, heav’d, and cleft asunder,

And, at the feet of Arvalan display’d,

Helmet and mail and shield and scymitar were laid.



9.



The Asuras, often put to flight,

And scattered in the fields of light,

By their foes’ celestial might,

Forged this enchanted armour for the fight.

‘Mid fires intense did they anneal,

In mountain furnaces, the quivering steel,

Till trembling through each deepening hue,

It settled in a midnight blue;

Last they cast it, to aslake,

In the penal icy lake.

Then, they consign’d it to the Giant brood;

And, while they forged the impenetrable arms,

The Evil Powers, to oversee them, stood,

And there imbued

The work of Giant strength with magic charms.

Foul Arvalan, with joy, survey’d

The crescent sabre’s cloudy blade,

With deeper joy the impervious mail,

The shield and helmet of avail.

Soon did he himself array,

And bade her speed him on his way.



10.



Then she led him to the den,

Where her chariot, night and day,

Stood harness’d, ready for the way.

Two Dragons, yok’d in adamant, convey

The magic car; from either collar sprung

An adamantine rib, which met in air,

O’er-arch’d, and crost, and bent diverging there,

And firmly in its arc upbore,

Upon their brazen necks, the seat of power.

Arvalan mounts the car, and in his hand

Receives the magic reins from Lorrinite;

The dragons, long obedient to command,

Their ample sails expand;

Like steeds well-broken to fair lady’s hand,

They feel the reins of might,

And up the northern sky begin their flight.



11.



Son of the Wicked, doth thy soul delight

To think its hour of vengeance now is nigh?

Lo! where the far-off light

Of Indra’s palace flashes on his sight,

And Meru’s heavenly summit shines on high,

With clouds, of glory bright,

Amid the dark-blue sky.

Already, in his hope, doth he espy

Himself secure in mail of tenfold charms,

Ereenia writhing from the magic blade,

The Father sent to bear his Curse,... the Maid

Resisting vainly in his impious arms.



12.



Ah, Sinner! whose anticipating soul

Incurs the guilt even when the crime is spar’d!

Joyous toward Meru’s summit on he far’d,

While the twin Dragons, rising as he guides.

With steady flight, steer northward for the pole.

Anon, with irresistible controul,

Force mightier far than his arrests their course;

It wrought as though a Power unseen, had caught

Their adamantine yokes to drag them on.

Straight on they bend their way, and now, in vain,

Upward doth Arvalan direct the rein!

The rein of magic might avails no more;

Bootless its strength against that unseen Power

Which, in their mid career,

Hath seiz’d the Chariot and the Charioteer.

With hands resisting, and down-pressing feet

Upon their hold insisting,

He struggles to maintain his difficult seat.

Seeking in vain with that strange Power to vie,

Their doubled speed the affrighted Dragons try.

Forced in a stream from whence was no retreat,

Strong as they are, behold them whirled along,

Headlong, with useless pennons, through the sky.



13.



What power was that, which, with resistless might

Foil’d the dread magic thus of Lorrinite?

’Twas all-commanding Nature... They were here

Within the sphere of the adamantine rocks

Which gird Mount Meru round, as far below

That heavenly height where Ganges hath its birth

Involv’d in clouds and light,

So far above its roots of ice and snow.

On... on they roll,.. rapt headlong they roll on;...

The lost canoe, less rapidly than this,

Down the precipitous stream is whirl’d along

To the brink of Niagara’s dread abyss.

On.. on.. they roll, and now, with shivering shock,

Are dash’d against the rock that girds the Pole.

Down from his shatter’d mail the unhappy Soul

Is dropt,.. ten thousand thousand fathoms down,...

Till in an ice-rift, ‘mid the eternal snow,

Foul Arvalan is stopt. There let him howl,

Groan there,.. and there, with unavailing moan,

For aid on his Almighty Father call.

All human sounds are lost

Amid those deserts of perpetual frost,

Old Winter’s drear domain,

Beyond the limits of the living World,

Beyond Kehama’s reign.

Of utterance and of motion soon bereft,

Frozen to the ice-rock, there behold him lie,

Only the painful sense of Being left,

A Spirit who must feel, and cannot die,

Bleaching and bare beneath the polar sky.





XII. THE SACRIFICE COMPLEATED.



O ye who, by the Lake

On Meru Mount, partake

The joys which Heaven hath destin’d for the blest,

Swift, swift, the moments fly,

The silent hours go by,

And ye must leave your dear abode of rest.

O wretched Man, prepare

Again thy Curse to bear!

Prepare, O wretched Maid, for farther woe!

The fatal hour draws near,

When Indra’s heavenly sphere

Must own the Tyrant of the World below.

To-day the hundredth Steed,

At Seeva’s shrine, must bleed,

The dreadful sacrifice is full to-day;

Nor man nor God hath power,

At this momentous hour,

Again to save the Swerga from his sway.

Fresh woes, O Maid divine,

Fresh trials must be thine;

And what must thou, Ladurlad, yet endure!

But let your hearts be strong,

And bear ye bravely on,

For Providence is good, and virtue is secure.



2.



They, little deeming that the fatal day

Was come, beheld where, through the morning sky,

A Ship of Heaven drew nigh.

Onward they watch it steer its steady flight;

Till, wondering, they espy

Old Casyapa, the Sire of Gods, alight.

But, when Ereenia saw the Sire appear,

At that unwonted and unwelcome sight

His heart receiv’d a sudden shock of fear:

Thy presence doth its doleful tidings tell,

O Father! cried the startled Glendoveer,

The dreadful hour is near! I know it well!

Not for less import would the Sire of Gods

Forsake his ancient and august abodes.



3.



Even so: serene the immortal Sire replies;

Soon like an earthquake will ye feel the blow

Which consummates the mighty sacrifice:

And this World, and its Heaven, and all therein

Are then Kehama’s. To the second ring

Of these seven Spheres, the Swerga-King,

Even now, prepares for flight,..

Beyond the circle of the conquer’d world,

Beyond the Rajah’s might.

Ocean, that clips this inmost of the Spheres,

And girds it round with everlasting roar,

Set like a gem appears

Within that bending shore.

Thither fly all the Sons of heavenly race:

I, too, forsake mine ancient dwelling-place.

And now, O Child and Father, ye must go,

Take up the burthen of your woe,

And wander once again below.

With patient heart hold onward to the end,...

Be true unto yourselves, and bear in mind

That every God is still the good Man’s friend;

And they, who suffer bravely, save mankind.



4.



Oh tell me, cried Ereenia, for from thee

Nought can be hidden, when the end will be!



5.



Seek not to know, old Casyapa replied,

What pleaseth Heaven to hide.

Dark is the abyss of time,

But light enough to guide your steps is given;

Whatever weal or woe betide,

Turn never from the way of truth aside,

And leave the event, in holy hope, to Heaven.

The moment is at hand, no more delay,

Ascend the etherial bark, and go your way;

And Ye, of heavenly nature, follow me.



6.



The will of Heaven be done, Ladurlad cried,

Nor more the man replied;

But placed his daughter in the etherial Bark,

Then took his seat beside.

There was no word at parting, no adieu.

Down from that empyreal height they flew:

One groan Ladurlad breath’d, yet uttered not,

When, to his heart and brain

The fiery Curse again like lightning shot.

And now on earth the Sire and Child alight,

Up soar’d the Ship of Heaven, and sail’d away from sight,



7.



O ye immortal Bowers,

Where hitherto the Hours

Have led their dance of happiness for aye,

With what a sense of woe

Do ye expect the blow,

And see your heavenly dwellers driven away!

Lo! where the aunnay-birds of graceful mien,

Whose milk-white forms were seen,

Lovely as Nymphs, your ancient trees between,

And by your silent springs,

With melancholy cry,

Now spread unwilling wings;

Their stately necks reluctant they protend,

And through the sullen sky,

To other worlds, their mournful progress bend.

The affrighted gales to-day

O’er their beloved streams no longer play,

The streams of Paradise have ceas’d to flow;

The Fountain-Tree withholds its diamond shower,

In this portentous hour,..

This dolorous hour,.. this universal woe.

Where is the Palace, whose far-flashing beams,

With streaks and streams of ever-varying light,

Brighten’d the polar night

Around the frozen North’s extremest shore?

Gone like a morning rainbow,.. like a dream...

A star that shoots and falls, and then is seen no more.



8.



Now! now!... Before the Golden Palaces,

The Bramin strikes the inevitable hour.

The fatal blow is given,

That over Earth and Heaven

Confirms the Almighty Rajah in his power.

All evil Spirits then,

That roam the World about,

Or wander through the sky,

Set up a joyful shout.

The Asuras and the Giants join the cry,

The damn’d in Padalon acclaim

Their hop’d Deliverer’s name;

Heaven trembles with the thunder-drowning sound;

Back starts affrighted Ocean from the shore,

And the adamantine vaults, and brazen floor

Of Hell, are shaken with the roar.

Up rose the Rajah through the conquer’d sky,

To seize the Swerga for his proud abode;

Myriads of evil Genii round him fly,

As royally, on wings of winds, he rode,

And scal’d high Heaven, triumphant like a God.





XIII. THE RETREAT.



1.



AROUND her Father’s neck the Maiden locked

Her arms, when that portentous blow was given:

Clinging to him, she heard the dread uproar,

And felt the shuddering shock which ran through Heaven;

Earth underneath them rocked,

Her strong foundations heaving in commotion,

Such as wild winds upraise in raving Ocean,

As though the solid base were rent asunder.

And lo, where, storming the astonished sky,

Kehama and his evil host ascend!

Before them rolls the thunder;

Ten thousand thousand lightnings round them fly;

Upward the lengthening pageantries aspire,

Leaving from Earth to Heaven a widening wake of fire.



2.



When the wild uproar was at length allayed,

And Earth, recovering from the shock, was still,

Thus to her Father spake the imploring Maid:

“Oh! by the love which we so long have borne

Each other, and we ne’er shall cease to bear;

Oh! by the sufferings we have shared,

And must not cease to share,

One boon I supplicate in this dread hour,

One consolation in this hour of woe!

Father, thou hast it in thy power:

Thou wilt not, Father, sure refuse me now

The only comfort my poor heart can know.”



3.



“O dearest, dearest Kailyal!” with a smile

Of tenderness and anguish, he replied,

“O best beloved, and to be loved the best,

Best worthy! set thy duteous heart at rest.

I know thy wish; and, let what will betide,

Ne’er will I leave thee wilfully again.

My soul is strengthened to endure its pain:

Be thou, in all my wanderings, still my guide;

Be thou, in all my sufferings, at my side.”



4.



The Maiden, at those welcome words, impressed

A passionate kiss upon her Father’s cheek:

They looked around them then, as if to seek

Where they should turn, — North, South, or East, or West,

Wherever to their vagrant feet seemed best.

But, turning from the view her mournful eyes,

“Oh! whither should we wander?” Kailyal cries,

Or wherefore seek in vain a place of rest?

Have we not here the Earth beneath our tread, Heaven overhead,

A brook that winds through this sequestered glade,

And yonder woods to yield us fruit and shade?

The little all our wants require is nigh;

Hope WE have none: why travel on in fear?

We cannot fly from Fate, and Fate will find us here.”



5.



’Twas a fair scene wherein they stood,

A green and sunny glade amid the wood.

And in the midst an aged Banian grew.

It was a goodly sight to see

That venerable tree;

For o’er the lawn, irregularly spread,

Fifty straight columns propped its lofty head;

And many a long, depending shoot,

Seeking to strike its root,

Straight, like a plummet, grew towards the ground.

Some on the lower boughs which crossed their way,

Fixing their bearded fibres round and round,

With many a ring and wild contortion wound;

Some to the passing wind, at times, with sway

Of gentle motion swung;

Others, of younger growth, unmoved, were hung

Like stone-drops from the cavern’s fretted height:

Beneath was smooth and fair to sight,

Nor weeds nor briers deformed the natural floor.

And through the leafy cope which bowered it o’er

Came gleams of checkered light.

So like a temple did it seem, that there

A pious heart’s first impulse would be prayer.



6.



A brook, with easy current, murmured near:

Water so cool and clear

The peasants drink not from the humble well,

Which they, with sacrifice of rural pride,

Have wedded to the cocoa-grove beside;

Nor tanks of costliest masonry dispense

To those in towns who dwell.

The work of Kings, in their beneficence.

Fed by perpetual springs, a small lagoon,

Pellucid, deep, and still, in silence joined,

And swelled the passing stream. Like burnished steel

Glowing, it lay beneath the eye of noon;

And when the breezes, in their play,

Ruffled the darkening surface, then, with gleam

Of sudden light, around the lotus-stem

It rippled; and the sacred flowers, that crown

The lakelet with their roseate beauty, ride,

In easy waving rocked, from side to side;

And, as the wind upheaves

Their broad and buoyant weight, the glossy leaves

Flap on the twinkling waters, up and down.



7.



They built them here a bower, of jointed cane,

Strong for the needful use; and light and long

Was the slight framework reared, with little pain;

Lithe creepers, then, the wicker sides supply,

And the tall jungle-grass fit roofing gave

Beneath the genial sky.

And here did Kailyal, each returning day,

Pour forth libations from the brook, to pay

The Spirits of her Sires their grateful rite:

In such libations poured in open glades,

Beside clear streams and solitary shades,

The Spirits of the virtuous dead delight.

And duly here, to Marriataly’s praise,

The Maid, as with an angel’s voice of song,

Poured her melodious lays

Upon the gales of even,

And, gliding in religious dance along,

Moved graceful as the dark-eyed Nymphs of Heaven;

Such harmony to all her steps was given.



8.



Thus ever, in her Father’s doting eye,

Kailyal performed the customary rite:

He, patient of his burning pain the while,

Beheld her, and approved her pious toil;

And sometimes, at the sight,

A melancholy smile

Would gleam upon his awful countenance.

He too, by day and night, and every hour,

Paid to a higher Power his sacrifice;

An offering, not of ghee, or fruit, and rice,

Flower-crown, or blood; but of a heart subdued,

A resolute, unconquered fortitude,

An agony repressed, a will resigned

To her, who, on her secret throne reclined.

Amid the Sea of Milk, by Vishnu’s side,

Looks with an eye of mercy on mankind.

By the Preserver, with his power endued,

There Voomdavee beholds this lower clime,

And marks the silent sufferings of the good,

To recompense them in her own good time.



9.



Oh force of faith! oh strength of virtuous will!

Behold him in his endless martyrdom,

Triumphant still!

The Curse still burning in his heart and brain;

And yet doth he remain

Patient the while, and tranquil and content!

The pious soul hath framed unto itself

A second nature, to exist in pain

As in its own allotted element.



10.



Such strength the will revealed had given

This holy pair, such influxes of grace,

That to their solitary resting-place

They brought the peace of Heaven.

Yea, all around was hallowed! Danger, Fear,

Nor thought of evil, ever entered here.

A charm was on the Leopard when he came

Within the circle of that mystic glade:

Submiss he crouched before the heavenly Maid,

And offered to her touch his speckled side;

Or with arched back erect, and bending head,

And eyes half closed for pleasure, would he stand,

Courting the pressure of her gentle hand



11.



Trampling his path through wood and brake,

And canes which crackling fell before his way,

And tassel-grass, whose silvery feathers play,

O’ertopping the young trees,

On comes the Elephant to slake

His thirst at noon in yon pellucid springs.

Lo! from his trunk upturned, aloft he flings

The grateful shower; and now,

Plucking the broad-leaved bough

Of yonder plane, with wavy motion slow,

Fanning the languid air,

He moves it to and fro.

But, when that form of beauty meets his sight,

The trunk its undulating motion stops,

From his forgetful hold the plane-branch drops;

Reverent he kneels, and lifts his rational eyes

To her as if in prayer;

And, when she pours her angel-voice in song,

Entranced he listens to the thrilling notes,

Till his strong temples, bathed with sudden dews,

Their fragrance of delight and love diffuse.



12.



Lo! as the voice melodious floats around,

The Antelope draws near;

The Tigress leaves her toothless cubs to hear;

The Snake comes gliding from the secret brake,

Himself in fascination forced along

By that enchanting song;

The antic Monkeys, whose wild gambols late,

When not a breeze waved the tall jungle-grass,

Shook the whole wood, are hushed, and silently

Hang on the clustered tree.

All things in wonder and delight are still;

Only at times the Nightingale is heard;

Not that in emulous skill that sweetest bird

Her rival strain would try,

A mighty songster, with the Maid to vie:

She only bore her part in powerful sympathy.



13.



Well might they thus adore that heavenly Maid!

For never Nymph of Mountain

Or Grove or Lake or Fountain

With a diviner presence filled the shade.

No idle ornaments deface

Her natural grace;

Musk-spot nor sandal-streak nor scarlet stain,

Eardrop nor chain, nor arm nor ankle-ring,

Nor trinketry on front or neck or breast,

Marring the perfect form: she seemed a thing

Of Heaven’s prime, uncorrupted work, a child

Of early nature undefiled,

A daughter of the years of innocence;

And therefore all things loved her. When she stood

Beside the glassy pool, the fish, that flies

Quick as an arrow from all other eyes,

Hovered to gaze on her; the mother-bird,

When Kailyal’s step she heard,

Sought not to tempt her from her secret nest,

But, hastening to the dear retreat, would fly

To meet and welcome her benignant eye.



14.



“Hope we have none,” said Kailyal to her Sire.

Said she aright? and had the mortal Maid

No thoughts of heavenly aid,

No secret hopes her inmost heart to move

With longings of such deep and pure desire

As Vestal Maids, whose piety is love,

Feel in their ecstasies, when, rapt above,

Their souls unto their heavenly Spouse aspire?

Why else so often doth that searching eye

Roam through the scope of sky?

Why, if she sees a distant speck on high,

Starts there that quick suffusion to her cheek?

’Tis but the Eagle in his heavenly height:

Reluctant to believe, she hears his cry,

And marks his wheeling flight,

Then pensively averts her mournful sight

Why ever else, at mom, that waking sigh,

Because the lovely form no more is nigh

Which hath been present to her soul all night;

And that injurious fear,

Which, ever as it riseth, is repressed,

Yet riseth still within her troubled breast,

That she no more shall see the Glendoveer?



15.



“Hath he forgotten me?” The wrongful thought

Would stir within her, and, though still repelled

With shame and self-reproaches, would recur.

Days after days unvarying come and go,

And neither friend nor foe

Approaches them in their sequestered bower.

Maid of strange destiny! but think not thou

Thou art forgotten now,

And hast no cause for further hope or fear:

High-fated Maid, thou dost not know

What eyes watch over thee for weal and woe!

Even at this hour,

Searching the dark decrees divine,

Kehama, in the fulness of his power,

Perceives his thread of fate in twine with thine.

The Glendoveer, from his far sphere,

With love that never sleeps, beholds thee here,

And in the hour permitted will be near.

Dark Lorrinite on thee hath fixed her sight,

And laid her wiles, to aid

Foul Arvalan when he shall next appear:

For well she weened his Spirit would renew

Old vengeance now with unremitting hate;

The Enchantress well that evil nature knew;

The accursed Spirit hath his prey in view;

And thus, while all their separate hopes pursue,

All work, unconsciously, the w ill of Fate.



16.



Fate worked its own the while. A band

Of Yoguees, as they roam the land,

Seeking a spouse for Jaga-Naut, their God,

Strayed to this solitary glade,

And reached the bower wherein the Maid abode.

Wondering at form so fair, they deemed the Power

Divine had led them to his chosen bride,

And seized and bore her from her Father’s side.





XIV. JAGA-NAUT.



1.



Joy in the City of great Jaga-Naut!

Joy in the seven-headed Idol’s shrine!

A Virgin-bride his ministers have brought,

A mortal Maid, in form and face divine,

Peerless among all daughters of mankind:

Searched they the world again from East to West,

In endless quest,

Seeking the fairest and the best.

No maid so lovely might they hope to find;

For she hath breathed celestial air,

And heavenly food hath been her fare,

And heavenly thoughts and feelings give her face

That heavenly grace.

Joy in the City of great Jaga-Naut!

Joy in the seven-headed Idol’s shrine!

The fairest Maid his Yoguees sought;

A fairer than the fairest have they brought,

A Maid of charms surpassing human thought,

A Maid divine.



2.



Now bring ye forth the Chariot of the God!

Bring him abroad,

That through the swarming City he may ride;

And by his side

Place ye the Maid of more than mortal grace,

The Maid of perfect form and heavenly face;

Set her aloft in triumph, like a bride

Upon the Bridal Car,

And spread the joyful tidings wide and far,

Spread it with trump and voice,

That all may hear, and all who hear rejoice,

Great Jaga-Naut hath found his mate! the God

Will ride abroad!

To-night will he go forth from his abode!

Ye myriads who adore him,

Prepare the way before him!



3.



Upreared on twenty wheels elate,

Huge as a Ship, the Bridal Car appeared:

Loud creak its ponderous wheels, as through the gate

A thousand Bramins drag the enormous load.

There throned aloft in state,

The Image of the seven-headed God

Came forth from his abode; and at his side

Sate Kailyal like a bride.

A bridal statue rather might she seem;

For she regarded all things like a dream,

Having no thought nor fear nor will, nor aught

Save hope and faith, that lived within her still.



4.



O silent Night! how have they startled thee

With the brazen trumpet’s blare!

And thou, O Moon! whose quiet light serene

Filleth wide heaven, and, bathing hill and wood,

Spreads o’er the peaceful valley like a flood,

How have they dimmed thee with the torches’ glare.

Which round yon moving pageant flame and flare,

As the wild rout, with deafening song and shout,

Fling their long flashes out,

That, like infernal lightnings, fire the air!



5.



A thousand pilgrims strain

Arm, shoulder, breast, and thigh, with might and main,

To drag that sacred wain,

And scarce can draw along the enormous load.

Prone fall the frantic votaries in its road,

And, calling on the God,

Their self-devoted bodies there they lay

To pave his chariot-way.

On Jaga-Naut they call:

The ponderous Car rolls on, and crushes all.

Through flesh and bones it ploughs its dreadful path.

Groans rise unheard; the dying cry,

And death and agony

Are trodden under foot by yon mad throng,

Who follow close, and thrust the deadly wheels along.



6.



Pale grows the Maid at this accursed sight:

The yells which round her rise

Have roused her with affright,

And fear hath given to her dilated eyes

A wilder light.

Where shall those eyes be turned? She knows not where!

Downward they dare not look, for there

Is death and horror and despair;

Nor can her patient looks to Heaven repair,

For the huge Idol over her, in air

Spreads his seven hideous heads, and wide

Extends their snaky necks on every side;

And all around, behind, before,

The Bridal Car, is the raging rout,

With frantic shout and deafening roar,

Tossing the torches’ flames about.

And the double double peals of the drum are there,

And the startling burst of the trumpet’s blare;

And the gong, that seems, with its thunders dread,

To astound the living, and waken the dead.

The ear-strings throb as if they were rent,

And the eyelids drop as stunned and spent.

Fain would the Maid have kept them fast;

But open they start at the crack of the blast.



7.



“Where art thou, Son of Heaven, Ereenia! where,

In this dread hour of horror and despair?”

Thinking on him, she strove her fear to quell:

“If he be near me, then will all be well;

And, if he reck not for my misery,

Let come the worst; it matters not to me.”

Repel that wrongful thought,

O Maid! thou feelest, but believ’st it not;

It is thine own imperfect nature’s fault

That lets one doubt of him arise within.

And this the Virgin knew, and like a sin

Repelled the thought, and still believed him true,

And summoned up her spirit to endure

All forms of fear, in that firm trust secure.



8.



She needs that faith, she needs that consolation;

For now the Car hath measured back its track

Of death, and hath re-entered now its station.

There, in the Temple-court, with song and dance,

A harlot-band, to meet the Maid, advance.

The drum hath ceased its peals; the trump and gong

Are still; the frantic crowd forbear their yells;

And sweet it was to hear the voice of song,

And the sweet music of their girdle-bells,

Armlets and anklets, that, with cheerful sound,

Symphonious tinkled as they wheeled around.



9.



They sung a bridal measure,

A song of pleasure,

A hymn of joyance and of gratulation:

“Go, chosen One!” they cried,

“Go, happy bride!

For thee the God descends in expectation!

For thy dear sake

He leaves his Heaven, O Maid of matchless charms

Go, happy One! the bed divine partake,

And fill his longing arms!”

Thus to the inner fane,

With circling dance and hymeneal strain,

The astonished Maid they led,

And there they laid her on the bridal bed.

Then forth they go, and close the Temple-gate,

And leave the wretched Kailyal to her fate.



10.



‘ Where art thou, Son of Heaven, Ereenia! where?

From the loathed bed she starts, and in the air

Looks up, as if she thought to find him there;

Then, in despair,

Anguish and agony, and hopeless prayer,

Prostrate she laid herself upon the floor.

There, trembling as she lay,

The Bramin of the fane advanced,

And came to seize his prey;

But, as the abominable Priest drew nigh,

A power invisible opposed his way.

Starting, he uttered wildly a death-cry,

And fell. At that the Maid all eagerly

Lifted in hope her head;

She thought her own deliverer had been near;

When, lo! with other life re-animate,

She saw the dead arise;

And, in the fiendish joy within his eyes,

She knew the hateful Spirit who looked through

Their specular orbs: clothed in the flesh of man,

She knew the accursèd Soul of Arvalan.



11.



“Where art thou, Son of Heaven, Ereenia! where?”

But not in vain, with sudden shriek of fear,

She calls Ereenia now; the Glendoveer

Is here! Upon the guilty sight he burst

Like lightning from a cloud, and caught the accurst,

Bore him to the roof aloft, and on the floor

With vengeance dashed him, quivering there in gore.

Lo! from the pregnant air, heart-withering sight,

There issued forth the dreadful Lorrinite.

“Seize him!” the Enchantress cried:

A host of Demons at her word appear,

And, like tornado-winds, from every side

At once they rush upon the Glendoveer.

Alone against a legion, little here

Avails his single might;

Nor that celestial falchion, which in fight

So oft had put the rebel race to flight.

There are no Gods on earth to give him aid:

Hemmed round, he is overpowered, beat down, and bound,

And at the feet of Lorrinite is laid.



12.



Meantime the scattered members of the slain,

Obedient to her mighty voice, assumed

Their vital form again;

And that foul Spirit, upon vengeance bent,

Fled to the fleshly tenement.

“Lo! here,” quoth Lorrinite, “ thou seest thy foe!

Him in the Ancient Sepulchres, below

The billows of the Ocean, will I lay:

Gods are there none to help him now, and there

For Man there is no way.

To that dread scene of durance and despair,

Azuras, bear your enemy! I go

To chain him in the Tombs. Meantime, do thou.

Freed from thy foe, and now secure from fear,

Son of Kehama! take thy pleasure here.”



13.



Her words the accursèd race obeyed:

Forth with a sound like rushing winds they fled;

And, of all aid from Earth or Heaven bereft,

Alone with Arvalan the Maid was left.

But, in that hour of agony, the Maid

Deserted not herself: her very dread

Had calmed her; and her heart

Knew the whole horror, and its only part.

“Yamen, receive me undefiled!” she said,

And seized a torch, and fired the bridal bed.

Up ran the rapid flames; on every side

They find their fuel wheresoe’er they spread,

Thin hangings, fragrant gums, and odorous wood,

That piled like sacrificial altars stood.

Around they run, and upward they aspire;

And, lo! the huge Pagoda lined with fire!



14.



The wicked Soul, who had assumed again

A form of sensible flesh for his foul will,

Still bent on base revenge, and baffled still.

Felt that corporeal shape alike to pain

Obnoxious as to pleasure: forth he flew,

Howling and scorched by the devouring flame;

Accursed Spirit! still condemned to rue,

The act of sin and punishment the same.

Freed from his loathsome touch, a natural dread

Came on the self-devoted; and she drew

Back from the flames which now toward her spread,

And, like a living monster, seemed to dart

Their hungry tongues toward their shrinking prey.

Soon she subdued her heart:

“O Father!” she exclaimed, “there was no way

But this! and thou, Ereenia! who for me

Sufferest, my soul shall bear thee company.”



15.



So having said, she knit

Her body up to work her soul’s desire,

And rush at once among the thickest fire.

A sudden cry withheld her: “Kailyal, stay!

Child! daughter! I am here!” the voice exclaims;

And from the gate, unharmed, through smoke and flames,

Like as a God, Ladurlad made his way,

Wrapped his preserving arms around, and bore

His Child, uninjured, o’er the burning floor.





XV. THE CITY OF BALY.



1.



KAILYAL.

Ereenia!



LADURLAD.

Nay, let no reproachful thought

Wrong his heroic heart! The Evil Powers

Have the dominion o’er this wretched World,

And no good Spirit now can venture here.



KAILYAL.

Alas, my Father! he hath ventured here,

And saved me from one horror. But the Powers

Of Evil beat him down, and bore away

To some dread scene of durance and despair;

The Ancient Tombs, methought their mistress said,

Beneath the ocean waves: no way for Man

Is there; and Gods, she boasted, there are none

On Earth to help him now.



LADURLAD.

Is that her boast?

And hath she laid him in the Ancient Tombs,

Relying that the Waves will guard him there?

Short-sighted are the eyes of Wickedness,

And all its craft but folly. O my child!

The Curses of the Wicked are upon me;

And the immortal Deities, who see

And suffer all things for their own wise end,

Have made them blessings to us!



KAILYAL.

Then thou knowest

Where they have borne him?



LADURLAD.

To the Sepulchres

Of the Ancient Kings, which Baly, in his power

Made in primeval times, and built above them

A City, like the Cities of the Gods,

Being like a God himself. For many an age

Hath Ocean warred against his Palaces,

Till, overwhelmed, they lie beneath the waves,

Not overthrown, so well the awful Chief

Had laid their deep foundations. Rightly said

The Accursed, that no way for Man was there;

But not like Man am I!



2.



Up from the ground the Maid exultant sprung,

And clapped her happy hands in attitude

Of thanks to Heaven, and flung

Her arms around her Father’s neck, and stood

Struggling awhile for utterance, with excess

Of hope and pious thankfulness.

“Come, come!” she cried. “Oh, let us not delay

He is in torments there! — away! away!”



3.



Long time they travelled on; at dawn of day

Still setting forward with the earliest light,

Nor ceasing from their way

Till darkness closed the night.

Short refuge from the noontide heat,

Reluctantly compelled, the Maiden took,

And ill her indefatigable feet

Could that brief respite brook.

Hope kept her up, and her intense desire

Supports that heart which ne’er at danger quails,

Those feet which never tire,

That frame which never fails.



4.



Their talk was of the City of the days

Of old, Earth’s wonder once, and of the fame

Of Baly, its great founder, — he whose name,

In ancient story and in poet’s praise,

Liveth and flourisheth for endless glory,

Because his might

Put down the wrong, and aye upheld the right;

Till for ambition, as old sages tell.

At length the universal Monarch fell:

For he, too, having made the World his own,

Then in his pride, had driven

The Devetas from Heaven,

And seized triumphantly the Swerga throne.

The Incarnate came before the Mighty One

In dwarfish stature, and in mien obscure:

The sacred cord he bore,

And asked, for Brama’s sake, a little boon,

Three steps of Baly’s ample reign, — no more.

Poor was the boon required, and poor was he

Who begged, — a little wretch it seemed to be.

But Baly ne’er refused a suppliant’s prayer:

He on the Dwarf cast down

A glance of pity in contemptuous mood,

And bade him take the boon,

And measure where he would.



5.



“Lo, Son of giant birth,

I take my grant!” the Incarnate Power replies.

With his first step he measured o’er the Earth;

The second spanned the skies.

“Three paces thou hast granted;

Twice have I set my footstep,” Vishnu cries;

“Where shall the third be planted?”



6.



Then Baly knew the God; and at his feet,

In homage due, he laid his humbled head.

“Mighty art thou, O Lord of Earth and Heaven!

Mighty art thou!” he said;

“Be merciful, and let me be forgiven.”

He asked for mercy of the Merciful,

And mercy for his virtue’s sake was shown.

For though he was cast down to Padalon,

Yet there, by Yamen’s throne,

Doth Baly sit in majesty and might,

To judge the dead, and sentence them aright.

And, forasmuch as he was still the friend

Of righteousness, it is permitted him,

Yearly, from those drear regions to ascend,

And walk the Earth, that he may hear his name

Still hymned and honored by the grateful voice

Of human-kind, and in his fame rejoice.



7.



Such was the talk they held upon their way,

Of him to whose old City they were bound;

And now, upon their journey, many a day

Had risen and closed, and many a week gone round,

And many a realm and region had they passed,

When now the Ancient Towers appeared at last



8.



Their golden summits, in the noonday light,

Shone o’er the dark-green deep that rolled between;

For domes and pinnacles and spires were seen

Peering above the sea, — a mournful sight!

Well might the sad beholder ween from thence

What works of wonder the devouring wave

Had swallowed there, when monuments so brave

Bore record of their old magnificence.

And on the sandy shore, beside the verge

Of Ocean, here and there, a rock-hewn fane

Resisted in its strength the surf and surge

That on their deep foundation? beat in vain.

In solitude the Ancient Temples stood,

Once resonant with instrument and song,

And solemn dance of festive multitude;

Now, as the weary ages pass along,

Hearing no voice save of the Ocean flood,

Which roars for ever on the restless shores;

Or, visiting their solitary caves,

The lonely sound of winds, that moan around

Accordant to the mclancholy waves.



9.



With reverence did the travellers see

The works of ancient days, and silently

Approach the shore. Now on the yellow sand,

Where round their feet the rising surges part,

They stand. Ladurlad’s heart

Exulted in his wondrous destiny.

To Heaven he raised his hand

In attitude of stern, heroic pride:

“Oh, what a power,” he cried,

“Thou dreadful Rajah, doth thy Curse impart!

IV. — thank thee now!” Then turning to the Maid,

“Thou seest how far and wide

Yon Towers extend,” he said:

“My search must needs be long. Meantime, the flood

Will cast thee up thy food;

And in the Chambers of the Rock, by night,

Take thou thy safe abode.

No prowling beast, to harm thee or affright,

Can enter there: but wrap thyself with care

From the foul Birds obscene that thirst for blood;

For in such caverns doth the Bat delight

To have its haunts. Do thou, with stone and shout,

Ere thou liest down at evening, scare them out,

And in this robe of mine involve thy feet.

Duly commend us both to Heaven in prayer;

Be of good heart, and may thy sleep be sweet!”



10.



So saying, he put back his arm, and gave

The cloth which girt his loins, and pressed her hand

With fervent love, then from the sand

Advanced into the sea: the coming Wave,

Which knew Kehama’s Curse, before his way

Started, and on he went as on dry land;

And still around his path the waters parted.

She stands upon the shore where seaweeds play,

Lashing her polished ankles; and the spray

Which off her Father, like a rainbow, fled,

Falls on her like a shower: there Kailyal stands,

And sees the billows rise above his head.

She, at the startling sight, forgot the power

The Curse had given him, and held forth her hands

Imploringly: her voice was on the wind.

And the deaf Ocean o’er Ladurlad closed.

Soon she recalled his destiny to mind,

And, shaking off that natural fear, composed

Her soul with prayer, to wait the event resigned.



11.



Alone, upon the solitary strand,

The lovely one is left: behold her go,

Pacing with patient footsteps, to and fro,

Along the bending sand!

Save her, ye Gods! from Evil Powers, and here

From man she need not fear:

For never Traveller comes near

These awful ruins of the days of yore;

Nor fisher’s bark, nor venturous mariner,

Approach the sacred shore.

All day she walked the beach; at night she sought

The Chamber of the Rock, with stone and shout

Assailed the Bats obscene, and scared them out;

Then in her Father’s robe involved her feet,

And wrapped her mantle round to guard her head,

And laid her down. The rock was Kailyal’s bed;

Her chamber-lamps were in the starry sky;

The winds and waters were her lullaby.



12.



“Be of good heart, and may thy sleep be sweet!”

Ladurlad said. Alas! that cannot be

To one whose days are days of misery.

How often did she stretch her hands to greet

Ereenia, rescued in the dreams of night I

How oft, amid the vision of delight,

Fear in her heart all is not as it seems!

Then from unsettled slumber start, and hear

The Winds that moan above, the Waves below!

Thou hast been called, O Sleep! the friend of Woe;

But ’tis the happy who have called thee so.



13.



Another day, another night, are gone;

A second passes, and a third wanes on.

So long she paced the shore,

So often on the beach she took her stand,

That the wild Sea-Birds knew her, and no more

Fled when she passed beside them on the strand.

Bright shine the golden summits in the light

Of the noon-sun, and lovelier far by night

Their moonlight glories o’er the sea they shed.

Fair is the dark-green deep; by night and day,

Unvexed with storms, the peaceful billows play,

As when they closed upon Ladurlad’s head;

The firmament above is bright and clear;

The sea-fowl, lords of water, air, and land,

Joyous alike upon the wing appear,

Or when they ride the waves or walk the sand;

Beauty and light and joy are everywhere;

There is no sadness and no sorrow here,

Save what that single human breast contains,

But, oh! what hopes and fears and pains are there!



14.



Seven miserable days the expectant Maid,

From earliest dawn till evening, watched the shore.

Hope left her then; and in her heart she said,

Never should she behold her Father more.





XVI. THE ANCIENT SEPULCHRES.



1.



WHEN the broad Ocean on Ladurlad’s head

Had closed, and arched him o’er,

With steady tread he held his way

Adown the sloping shore.

The dark-green waves with emerald hue?

Imbue the beams of day;

And on the wrinkled sand below,

Rolling their mazy network to and fro,

Light shadows shift and play.

The hungry Shark, at scent of prey,

Toward Ladurlad darted;

Beholding then that human form erect,

How like a God the depths he trod,

Appalled the monster started,

And in his fear departed.

Onward Ladurlad went with heart elate,

And now hath reached the Ancient City’s gate.



2.



Wondering he stood awhile to gaze

Upon the works of elder days.

The brazen portals open stood,

Even as the fearful multitude

Had left them, when they fled

Before the rising flood.

High overhead, sublime,

The mighty gateway’s storied roof was spread,

Dwarfing the puny piles of younger time.

With the deeds of days of yore

That ample roof was sculptured o’er;

And many a godlike form there met his eye,

And many an emblem dark of mystery.

Through these wide portals oft had Baly rode

Triumphant from his proud abode,

When, in his greatness, he bestrode

The Aullay, hugest of four-footed kind,

The Aullay-Horse, that in his force,

With elephantine trunk, could bind

And lift the elephant, and on the wind

Whirl him away with sway and swing,

Even like a pebble from the practised sling.



3.



Those streets which never, since the days of yore,

By human footstep had been visited,

Those streets which never more

A human foot shall tread,

Ladurlad trod. In sunlight and sea-green,

The thousand Palaces were seen

Of that proud City, whose superb abodes

Seemed reared by Giants for the immortal Gods.

How silent and how beautiful they stand,

Like things of Nature! the eternal rocks

Themselves not firmer. Neither hath the sand

Drifted within their gates and choked their doors,

Nor slime defiled their pavements and their floors.

Did, then, the Ocean wage

His war for love and envy, not in rage,

O thou fair City! that he spared thee thus?

Art thou Varounin’s capital and court,

Where all the Sea-Gods for delight resort,

A place too godlike to be held by us,

The poor, degenerate children of the Earth?

So thought Ladurlad, as he looked around,

Weening to hear the sound

Of Mermaid’s shell, and song

Of choral throng from some imperial hall,

Wherein the Immortal Powers, at festival,

Their high carousals keep.

But all is silence dread,

Silence profound and dead,

The everlasting stillness of the Deep.



4.



Through many a solitary street,

And silent market-place and lonely square,

Armed with the mighty Curse, behold him fare!

And now his feet attain that royal fane

Where Baly held of old his awful reign.

What once had been the Gardens spread around,

Fair Gardens, once which wore perpetual green,

Where all sweet flowers through all the year were found,

And all fair fruits were through all seasons seen

A place of Paradise, where each device

Of emulous Art with Nature strove to vie;

And Nature, on her part,

Called forth new powers wherewith to vanquish Art

The Swerga-God himself, with envious eye,

Surveyed those peerless gardens in their prime;

Nor ever did the Lord of Light,

Who circles Earth and Heaven upon his way,

Behold from eldest time a goodlier sight

Than were the groves which Baly, in his might,

Made for his chosen place of solace and delight.



5.



It was a Garden still beyond all price;

Even yet it was a place of Paradise:

For where the mighty Ocean could not spare,

There had he, with his own creation,

Sought to repair his work of devastation.

And here were coral bowers,

And grots of madrepores,

And banks of sponge, as soft and fair to eye

As ere was mossy bed

Whereon the Wood-Nymphs lie

With languid limbs, in summer’s sultry hours.

Here, too, were living flowers,

Which, like a bud compacted,

Their purple cups contracted,

And now, in open blossom spread,

Stretched like green anthers many a seeking head.

And arborets of jointed stone were there,

And plants of fibres fine as silkworm’s thread;

Yea, beautiful as Mermaid’s golden hair

Upon the waves dispread.

Others that, like the broad banana growing,

Raised their long, wrinkled leaves of purple hue,

Like streamers wide outflowing.

And, whatsoe’er the depths of Ocean hide

From human eyes, Ladurlad there espied,

Trees of the deep, and shrubs and fruits and flowers

As fair as ours,

Wherewith the Sea-Nymphs love their locks to braid,

When to their father’s hall, at festival

Repairing, they, in emulous array,

Their charms display

To grace the banquet and the solemn day



6.



The golden fountains had not ceased to flow;

And, where they mingled with the briny Sea,

There was a sight of wonder and delight

To see the fish, like birds in air,

Above Ladurlad flying.

Round those strange waters they repair,

Their scarlet fins outspread and plying;

They float with gentle hovering there;

And now upon those little wings,

As if to dare forbidden things,

With wilful purpose bent,

Swift as an arrow from a bow,

They shoot across, and to and fro,

In rapid glance, like lightning go

Through that unwonted element



7.



Almost, in scenes so wondrous fair,

Ladurlad had forgot

The mighty cause which led him there:

His busy eye was everywhere;

His mind had lost all thought;

His heart, surrendered to the joys

Of sight, was happy as a boy’s.

But soon the awakening thought recurs

Of him who in the Sepulchres,

Hopeless of human aid, in chains is laid;

And her who, on the solitary shore,

By night and day, her weary watch will keep,

Till she shall see them issuing from the deep.



8.



Now hath Ladurlad reached the Court

Of the great Palace of the King: its floor

Was of the marble rock; and there, before

The imperial door,

A mighty Image on the steps was seen,

Of stature huge, of countenance serene.

A crown and sceptre at his feet were laid;

One hand a scroll displayed;

The other pointed there, that all might see:

“My name is Death,” it said;

“In mercy have the Gods appointed me.”

Two brazen gates beneath him, night and day,

Stood open; and within them you behold

Descending steps, which in the living stone

Were hewn, a spacious way

Down to the Chambers of the Kings of old.



9.



Trembling with hope, the adventurous man descended.

The sea-green light of day

Not far along the vault extended;

But, where the slant reflection ended,

Another light was seen,

Of red and fiery hue,

That with the water blended,

And gave the secrets of the Tombs to view



10.



Deep in the marble rock, the Hall

Of Death was hollowed out, — a chamber wide,

Low-roofed, and long: on either side,

Each in his own alcove and on his throne,

The Kings of old were seated; in his hand

Each held the sceptre of command,

From whence, across that scene of endless night,

A carbuncle diffused its everlasting light.



11.



So well had the embalmers done their part

With spice and precious unguents to imbue

The perfect corpse, that each had still the hue

Of living man; and every limb was still

Supple and firm and full as when of yore

Its motion answered to the moving will.

The robes of royalty, which once they wore,

Long since had mouldered off, and left them bare:

Naked upon their thrones behold them there,

Statues of actual flesh, — a fearful sight!

Their large and rayless eyes,

Dimly reflecting to that gem-born light,

Glazed, fixed, and meaningless, — yet, open wide,

Their ghastly balls belied

The mockery of life in all beside.



12.



But if, amid these chambers drear,

Death were a sight of shuddering and of fear,

Life was a thing of stranger horror here.

For at the farther end, in yon alcove,

Where Baly should have lain, had he obeyed

Man’s common lot, behold Ereenia laid!

Strong fetters link him to the rock: his eye

Now rolls and widens, as with effort vain

He strives to break the chain,

Now seems to brood upon his misery.

Before him couched there lay

One of the mighty monsters of the deep,

Whom Lorrinite, encountering on the way,

There stationed, his perpetual guard to keep:

In the sport of wanton power, she charmed him there

As if to mock the Glendoveer’s despair.



13.



Upward his form was human, save that here

The skin was covered o’er with scale on scale

Compact, a panoply of natural mail;

His mouth, from ear to ear,

Weaponed with triple teeth, extended wide,

And tusks on either side;

A double snake below, he rolled

His supple length behind in many a sinuous fold.



14.



With red and kindling eye, the Beast beholds

A living man draw nigh,

And, rising on his folds,

In hungry joy awaits the expected feast,

His mouth half open, and his teeth unsheathed.

Then on he sprung, and in his scaly arms

Seized him, and fastened on his neck, to suck,

With greedy lips, the warm life-blood; and sure,

But for the mighty power of magic charms,

As easily as in the blithesome hour

Of spring a child doth crop the meadow-flower,

Piecemeal those claws

Had rent their victim, and those armed jaws

Snapped him in twain. Naked Ladurlad stood,

Yet fearless and unharmed in this dread strife,

So well Kehama’s Curse had charmed his fated life.



15.



He, too, — for anger, rising at the sight

Of him he sought, in such strange thrall confined.

With desperate courage fired Ladurlad’s mind,

He, too, unto the fight himself addressed;

And, grappling breast to breast,

With foot firm-planted stands,

And seized the monster’s throat with both his hands.

Vainly, with throttling grasp, he pressed

The impenetrable scales;

And, lo! the Guard rose up, and round his foe,

With gliding motion, wreathed his lengthening coils,

Then tightened all their folds with stress and strain.

Nought would the raging Tiger’s strength avail,

If once involved within those mighty toils;

The armed Rhinoceros, so clasped, in vain

Had trusted to his hide of rugged mail,

His bones all broken, and the breath of life

Crushed from the lungs, in that unequal strife.

Again, and yet again, he sought to break

The impassive limbs; but, when the Monster found

His utmost power was vain,

A moment he relaxed in every round,

Then knit his coils again with closer strain,

And, bearing forward, forced him to the ground.



16.



Ereenia groaned in anguish at the sight

Of this dread fight: once more the Glendoveer

Essayed to break his bonds; and fear

For that brave father, who had sought him here,

Stung him to wilder strugglings. From the rock

He raised himself half up, with might and main

Plucked at the adamantine chain,

And now, with long and unrelaxing strain,

In obstinate effort of indignant strength,

Labored and strove in vain;

Till his immortal sinews failed at length;

And yielding, with an inward groan, to fate,

Despairingly, he let himself again

Fall prostrate on his prison-bed of stone,

Body and chain alike with lifeless weight.



17.



Struggling they lay in mortal fray

All day, while day was in our upper sphere;

For light of day

And natural darkness never entered here;

All night, with unabated might,

They waged the unremitting fight.

A second day, a second night,

With furious will they wrestled still.

The third came on, the fourth is gone;

Another comes, another goes;

And yet no respite, no repose!

But day and night, and night and day,

Involved in mortal strife they lay;

Six days and nights have passed away,

And still they wage, with mutual rage,

The unremitting fray.

With mutual rage their war they wage,

But not with mutual will;

For, when the seventh morning came,

The Monster’s worn and wearied frame

In this strange contest fails;

And weaker, weaker, every hour,

He yields beneath strong Nature’s power;

For now the Curse prevails.



18.



Sometimes the Beast sprung up to bear

His foe aloft, and, trusting there

To shake him from his hold,

Relaxed the rings that wreathed him round

But on his throat Ladurlad hung,

And weighed him to the ground;

And if they sink, or if they float,

Alike with stubborn clasp he clung,

Tenacious of his grasp:

For well he knew with what a power,

Exempt from Nature’s laws,

The Curse had armed him for this hour:

And in the Monster’s gasping jaws,

And in his hollow eye,

Well could Ladurlad now descry

The certain signs of victory.



19.



And now the Beast no more can keep

His painful watch; his eyes, oppressed,

Are fainting for their natural sleep;

His living flesh and blood must rest;

The Beast must sleep or die.

Then he, full faint and languidly,

Unwreathes his rings, and strives to fly;

And, still retreating, slowly trails

His stiff and heavy length of scales.

But that unweariable foe,

With will relentless, follows still;

No breathing-time, no pause of fight,

He gives, but presses on his flight:

Along the vaulted chambers, and the ascent

Up to the emerald-tinted light of day,

He harasses his way,

Till lifeless, underneath his grasp,

The huge Sea-Monster lay.



20.



“That obstinate work is done!” Ladurlad cried

“One labor yet remains!”

And thoughtfully he eyed

Ereenia’s ponderous chains;

And with faint effort, half despairing, tried

The rivets deep in-driven. Instinctively,

As if in search of aid, he looked around:

Oh, then how gladly, in the near alcove,

Fallen on the ground its lifeless Lord beside,

The crescent cimeter he spied,

Whose cloudy blade, with potent spells imbued,

Had lain so many an age unhurt in solitude!



21.



Joyfully springing there,

He seized the weapon, and with eager stroke

Hewed at the chain: the force was dealt in vain;

For not as if through yielding air

Passed the descending cimeter:

Its deadened way the heavy water broke;

Yet it bit deep. Again, with both his hands,

He wields the blade, and dealt a surer blow.

The baser metal yields

To that fine edge; and, lo! the Glendoveer

Elises, and snaps the half-severed links, and stands

Freed from his broken bands.





XVII. BALY.



1.



This is the appointed night,

The night of joy and consecrated mirth,

When from his judgment-seat in Padalon,

By Yamen’s throne,

Baly goes forth, that he may walk the Earth

Unseen, and hear his name

Still hymned and honored by the grateful voice

Of human-kind, and in his fame rejoice.

Therefore, from door to door, and street to street,

With willing feet,

Shaking their firebrands, the glad children run:

“Baly! great Baly!” they acclaim;

Where’er they run, they bear the mighty name;

Where’er they meet,

“Baly! great Baly!” still their choral tongues repeat.

Therefore at every door the votive flame

Through pendent lanterns sheds its painted light;

And rockets, hissing upward through the sky.

Fall like a shower of stars

From Heaven’s black canopy.

Therefore, on yonder mountain’s templed height,

The brazen caldron blazes through the night.

Huge as a Ship that travels the main sea

Is that capacious brass; its wick as tall

As is the mast of some great admiral.

Ten thousand votaries bring

Camphor and ghee to feed the sacred flame;

And while, through regions round, the nations see

Its fiery pillar curling high in heaven,

“Baly! great Baly!” they exclaim;

“For ever hallowed be his blessed name!

Honor and praise to him for evermore be given!”



2.



Why art not thou among the festive throng,

Baly, O righteous Judge! to hear thy fame?

Still, as of yore, with pageantry and song,

The glowing streets along,

They celebrate thy name;

“Baly! great Baly!” still

The grateful habitants of Earth acclaim;

“Baly! great Baly!” still

The ringing walls and echoing towers proclaim.

From yonder mountain the portentous flame

Still blazes to the nations as before;

All things appear to human eyes the same,

As perfect, as of yore;

To human eyes, — but how unlike to thine!

Thine, which were wont to see

The Company divine,

That with their presence came to honor thee!

For all the blessed ones of mortal birth

Who have been clothed with immortality,

From the eight corners of the Earth,

From the Seven Worlds assembling, all

Wont to attend thy solemn festival.

Then did thine eyes behold

The wide air peopled with that glorious train;

Now mayst thou seek the blessed ones in vain,

For Earth and Air are now beneath the Rajah’s reign.



3.



Therefore the righteous Judge hath walked the Earth

In sorrow and in solitude to-night.

The sound of human mirth

To him is no delight:

He turns away from that ungrateful sight,

Hallowed not now by visitants divine;

And there he bends his melancholy way,

Where, in yon full-orbed Moon’s refulgent light,

The Golden Towers of his old City shine

Above the silver sea. The ancient Chief

There bent his way in grief,

As if sad thoughts indulged would work their own relief.



4.



There he beholds, upon the sand,

A lovely Maiden in the moonlight stand.

The land-breeze lifts her locks of jet;

The waves around her polished ankles play;

Her bosom with the salt sea-spray is wet;

Her arms are crossed, unconsciously, to fold

That bosom from the cold;

While, statue-like, she seems her watch to keep,

Gazing intently on the restless deep.



5.



Seven miserable days had Kailyal there,

From earliest dawn till evening, watched the deep;

Six nights, within the Chamber of the Rock,

Had laid her down, and found in prayer

That comfort which she sought in vain from sleep.

But, when the seventh night came,

Never should she behold her father more,

The wretched Maiden said, in her despair;

Yet would not quit the shore,

Nor turn her eyes one moment from the sea:

Never before

Had Kailyal watched it so impatiently;

Never so eagerly had hoped before,

As now, when she believed, and said, all hope was o’er.



6.



Beholding her, how beautiful she stood,

In that wild solitude,

Baly from his invisibility

Had issued then, to know her cause of woe;

But that, in the air beside her, he espied

Two Powers of Evil for her hurt allied,

Foul Arvalan and dreadful Lorrinite.

Walking in darkness, him they could not see;

And, marking with what demon-like delight

They kept their innocent prey in sight,

He waits, expecting what the end may be.



7.



She starts; for, lo! where, floating many a rood,

A Monster, hugest of the Ocean brood,

Weltering and lifeless, drifts toward the shore.

Backward she starts in fear before the flood;

And, when the waves retreat,

They leave their hideous burden at her feet.



8.



She ventures to approach with timid tread;

She starts, and half draws back in fear,

Then stops, and stretches out her head

To see if that huge Beast indeed be dead.

Now, growing bold, the Maid advances near,

Even to the margin of the ocean-flood.

Rightly she reads her Father’s victory,

And lifts her joyous hands exultingly

To Heaven, in gratitude;

Then spreading them toward the Sea,

While pious tears bedim her streaming eyes,

“Come! come! my Father, come to me!

Ereenia, come!” she cries:

Lo! from the opening deep they rise,

And to Ladurlad’s arms the happy Kailyal flies.



9.



She turned from him, to meet, with beating heart

The Glendoveer’s embrace.

“Now turn to me, for mine thou art!”

Foul Arvalan exclaimed: his loathsome face

Came forth, and from the air,

In fleshly form, he burst.

Always in horror and despair

Had Kailyal seen the form and face accurst;

But yet so sharp a pang had ne’er

Shot with a thrill like death through all her frame,

As now when on her hour of joy the Spectre came.



10.



Vain is resistance now:

The fiendish laugh of Lorrinite is heard;

And, at her dreadful word,

The Asuras once again appear,

And seize Ladurlad and the Glendoveer.



11.



“Hold your accursed hands!”

A voice exclaimed, whose dread commands

Were feared through all the vaults of Padalon;

And there among them, in the midnight air,

The presence of the mighty Baly shone.

He, making manifest his mightiness,

Put forth on every side an hundred arms,

And seized the Sorceress: maugre all her charms,

Her and her fiendish ministers he caught

With force as uncontrollable as fate;

And that unhappy Soul, to whom

The Almighty Rajah’s power availeth not

Living to avert, nor dead to mitigate,

His righteous doom.



12.



“Help, help, Kehama! Father, help!” he cried;

But Baly tarried not to abide

That mightier Power: with irresistible feet

He stamped and cleft the Earth; it opened wide.

And gave him way to his own Judgment-seat.

Down, like a plummet, to the World below

He sunk, and bore his prey

To punishment deserved, and endless woe.





XVIII. KEHAMA’S DESCENT.



1.



Tne Earth, by Baly’s feet divided,

Closed o’er his way as to the Judgment-seat

He plunged, and bore his prey.

Scarce had the shock subsided,

When, darting from the Swerga’s heavenly heights,

Kehama, like a thunder-bolt, alights.

In wrath he came: a bickering flame

Flashed from his eyes, which made the moonlight dim;

And passion forcing way from every limb,

Like furnace-smoke, with terrors wrapt him round.

Furious he smote the ground;

Earth trembled underneath the dreadful stroke,

Again in sunder riven;

He hurled in rage his whirling weapon down.

But, lo! the fiery sheckra to his feet

Returned, as if by equal force redriven;

And from the abyss the voice of Baly came:

“Not yet, O Rajah! hast thou won

The realms of Padalon!

Earth and the Swerga are thine own;

But, till Kehama shall subdue the throne

Of Hell, in torments Yamen holds his son.”



2.



“Fool that he is! — in torments let him lie!”

Kehama, wrathful at his son, replied.

“But what am I,

That thou shouldst brave me?” kindling in his

pride,

The dreadful Rajah cried.

“Ho! Yamen! hear me. God of Padalon!

Prepare thy throne,

And let the Amreeta cup

Be ready for my lips, when I anon

Triumphantly shall take my seat thereon,

And plant upon thy neck my royal feet.”



3.



In voice like thunder thus the Rajah cried,

Impending o’er the abyss, with menacing hand

Put forth, as in the action of command,

And eyes that darted their red anger down.

Then, drawing back, he let the earth subside.

And, as his wrath relaxed, surveyed,

Thoughtfully and silently, the mortal Maid.

Her eye the while was on the farthest sky,

Where up the ethereal height

Ereenia rose, and passed away from sight.

Never had she so joyfully

Beheld the coming of the Glendoveer,

Dear as he was and he deserved to be,

As now she saw him rise and disappear.

Come nOW what will,” within her heart said she;

“For thou art safe, and what have I to fear?”



4.



Meantime the Almighty Rajah, late

In power and majesty and wrath arrayed,

Had laid his terrors by,

And gazed upon the Maid.

Pride could not quit his eye,

Nor that remorseless nature from his front

Depart; yet whose had beheld him then

Had felt some admiration mixed with dread,

And might have said,

That sure he seemed to be the King of Men!

Less than the greatest that he could not be,

Who carried in his port such might and majesty.



5.



In fear no longer for the Glendoveer,

Now towards the Rajah Kailyal turned her eyes,

As if to ask what doom awaited her.

But then surprise,

Even as with fascination, held them there;

So strange a thing it seemed to see the change

Of purport in that all-commanding brow,

Which thoughtfully was bent upon her now.

Wondering she gazed, the while her Father’s eye

Was fixed upon Kehama haughtily:

It spake defiance to him, high disdain,

Stern patience unsubduable by pain,

And pride triumphant over agony.



6.



“Ladurlad,” said the Rajah, “thou and I

Alike have done the work of Destiny,

Unknowing each to what the impulse tended;

But now that over Earth and Heaven my reign

Is stablished, and the ways of Fate are plain

Before me, here our enmity is ended:

II — take away thy Curse.” As thus he said,

The fire which in Ladurlad’s heart and brain

Was burning, fled, and left him free from pain.

So rapidly his torments were departed,

That at the sudden ease he started

As with a shock; and to his head

His hands upfled,

As if he felt through every failing limb

The power and sense of life forsaking him-



7.



Then, turning to the Maid, the Rajah cried,

“O Virgin! above all of mortal birth

Favored alike in beauty and in worth,

And in the glories of thy destiny,

Now let thy happy heart exult with pride;

For Fate hath chosen thee

To be Kehama’s bride,

To be the Queen of Heaven and Earth,

And of whatever Worlds beside

Infinity may hide; for I can see

The writing which, at thy nativity,

All-knowing Nature wrought upon thy brain,

In branching veins, which to the gifted eye

Map out the mazes of futurity.

There is it written, Maid, that thou and I,

Alone of human-kind a deathless pair,

Are doomed to share

The Amreeta-drink divine

Of immortality. Come, Maiden mine!

High-fated One, ascend the subject sky,

And by Kehama’s side

Sit on the Swerga throne, his equal bride.”



8.



“Oh! never, never, Father!” Kailyal cried:

“It is not as he saith; it cannot be! —

I — ! — I his bride!

Nature is never false; he wrongeth her!

My heart belies such lines of destiny:

There is no other true interpreter!”



9.



At that reply, Kehama’s darkening brow

Bewrayed the anger which he yet suppressed:

“Counsel thy daughter! tell her thou art now

Free from thy Curse,” he said; “and bid her bow

In thankfulness to Fate’s benign behest

Bid her her stubborn will restrain,

For Destiny at last must be obeyed;

And tell her, while obedience is delayed,

Thy Curse will burn again.”



10.



“She needeth not my counsel,” he replied;

“And idly, Rajah, dost thou reason thus

Of Destiny! for though all other things

Were subject to the starry influencings,

And bowed submissive to thy tyranny,

The virtuous heart and resolute mind are free.

Thus in their wisdom did the Gods decree,

When they created man. Let come what will,

This is our rock of strength: in every ill,

Sorrow, oppression, pain, and agony,

The spirit of the good is unsubdued,

And, suffer as they may, they triumph still.”



11.



“Obstinate fools!” exclaimed the Mighty One,

“Fate and my pleasure must be done.

And ye resist in vain!

Take your fit guerdon till we meet again!”

So saying, his vindictive hand he flung

Towards them, filled with curses; then on high

Aloft he sprung, and vanished through the Sky.





XIX. MOUNT CALASAY.



1.



THE Rajah, scattering curses as he rose,

Soared to the Swerga, and resumed his throne.

Not for his own redoubled agony,

Which now through heart and brain,

With renovated pain,

Rushed to its seat, Ladurlad breathes that groan.

That groan is for his child; he groaned to see

That she was stricken now with leprosy,

Which, as the enemy vindictive fled,

O’er all her frame with quick contagion spread.

She, wondering at events so passing strange,

And filled with hope and fear,

And joy to see the Tyrant disappear,

And glad expectance of her Glendoveer,

Perceived not in herself the hideous change.

His burning pain, she thought, had forced the groan

Her father breathed; his agonies alone

Were present to her mind: she clasped his knees,

Wept for his Curse, and did not feel her own.



2.



Nor, when she saw her plague, did her good heart,

True to itself, even for a moment fail.

“Ha, Rajah!” with disdainful smile she cries,

“Mighty and wise and wicked as thou art,

Still thy blind vengeance acts a friendly part

Shall I not thank thee for this scurf and scale

Of dire deformity, whose loathsomeness,

Surer than panoply of strongest mail,

Arms me against all foes? Oh, better so,

Better such foul disgrace,

Than that this innocent face

Should tempt thy wooing! That I need not dread:

Nor ever impious foe

Will offer outrage now, nor further woe

Will beauty draw on my unhappy head;

Safe through the unholy world may Kailyal go.”



3.



Her face, in virtuous pride,

Was lifted to the skies,

As him and his poor vengeance she defied;

But earthward, when she ceased, she turned her eyes,

As if she sought to hide

The tear which in her own despite would rise.

Did then the thought of her own Glendoveer

Call forth that natural tear?

Was it a woman’s fear,

A thought of earthly love, which troubled her?

Like yon thin cloud amid the moonlight sky,

That flits before the wind,

And leaves no trace behind,

The womanly pang passed over Kailyal’s mind.

“This is a loathsome sight to human eve!”

Half shrinking at herself, the Maiden thought;

“Will it be so to him? Oh, surely not!

The immortal Powers, who see

Through the poor wrappings of mortality,

Behold the soul, the beautiful soul, within,

Exempt from age and wasting maladies,

And undeformed, while pure and free from sin.

This is a loathsome sight to human eyes,

But not to eyes divine;

Ereenia, Son of Heaven, oh, not to thine!”



4.



The wrongful thought of fear, the womanly pain,

Had passed away; her heart was calm again.

She raised her head, expecting now to see

The Glendoveer appear:

“Where hath he fled,” quoth she,

“That he should tarry now?” Oh! had she known

Whither the adventurous Son of Heaven was flown,

Strong as her spirit was, it had not borne

The appalling thought, nor dared to hope for his return.



5.



For he in search of Siva’s throne was gone,

To tell his tale of wrong;

In search of Siva’s own abode,

The Glendoveer began his heavenly road.

Oh wild emprise! above the farthest skies

He hoped to rise!

Him who is throned beyond the reach of thought,

The Alone, the Inaccessible, he sought.

Oh wild emprise! for when, in days of yore,

For proud pre-eminence of power,

Brama and Vishnu, wild with rage, contended,

And Siva, in his might,

Their dread contention ended,

Before their sight

In form a fiery column did he tower,

Whose head above the highest height extended,

Whose base below the deepest depth descended.

Downward, its depth to sound,

Vishnu a thousand years explored

The fathomless profound,

And yet no base he found:

Upward to reach its head,

Ten myriad years the aspiring Brama soared;

And still, as up he fled,

Above him still the Immeasurable spread.

The rivals owned their Lord,

And trembled and adored.

How shall the Glendoveer attain

What Brama and what Vishnu sought in vain?



6.



Ne’er did such thought of lofty daring enter

Celestial Spirit’s mind. Oh wild adventure

That throne to find! for he must leave behind

This World, that in the centre,

Within its salt-sea girdle, lies confined;

Yea, the Seven Earths, that, each with its own ocean,

Ring clasping ring, compose the mighty round.

What power of motion

In less than endless years shall bear him there,

Along the limitless extent,

To the utmost bound of the remotest sphere?

What strength of wing

Suffice to pierce the Golden Firmament

That closes all within?

Yet he hath passed the measureless extent,

And pierced the Golden Firmament;

For Faith hath given him power, and Space and Time

Vanish before that energy sublime.

Nor doth eternal Night

And outer Darkness check his resolute flight:

By strong desire through all he makes his way,

Till Siva’s Seat appears, — behold Mount Calasay!



7.



Behold the Silver Mountain! Round about

Seven ladders stand, so high, the aching eye,

Seeking their tops in vain amid the sky,

Might deem they led from earth to highest Heaven

Ages would pass away,

And worlds with age decay,

Ere one whose patient feet, from ring to ring,

Must win their upward way,

Could reach the summit of Mount Calasay.

But that strong power that nerved his wing,

That all-surmounting will,

Intensity of faith and holiest love,

Sustained Ereenia still;

And he hath gained the plain, the sanctuary above



8.



Lo, there the Silver Bell,

That, self-sustained, hangs buoyant in the air!

Lo, the broad Table there, too bright

For mortal sight,

From whose four sides the bordering gems unite

Their harmonizing rays

In one mid fount of many-colored light!

The stream of splendor, flashing as it flows,

Plays round and feeds the stem of yon celestial Rose!

Where is the Sage whose wisdom can declare

The hidden things of that mysterious flower,

That flower which serves all mysteries to bear?

The sacred Triangle is there,

Holding the Emblem which no tongue may tell:

Is this the Heaven of Heavens, where Siva’s self doth dwell?



9.



Here first the Glendoveer

Felt his wing flag, and paused upon his flight.

Was it that fear came over him, when here

He saw the imagined throne appear?

Not so; for his immortal sight

Endured the Table’s light:

Distinctly he beheld all things around;

And doubt and wonder rose within his mind

That this was all he found.

Howbeit he lifted up his voice, and spake:

“There is oppression in the World below;

Earth groans beneath the yoke; yea, in her woe,

She asks if the Avenger’s eye is blind.

Awake, O Lord, awake!

Too long thy vengeance sleepeth. Holiest One!

Put thou thy terrors on for mercy’s sake,

And strike the blow, in justice to mankind!”



10.



So, as he prayed, intenser faith he felt:

His spirit seemed to melt

With ardent yearnings of increasing love.

Upward he turned his eyes,

As if there should be something yet above:

“Let me not, Siva, seek in vain!” he cries.

“Thou art not here; for how should these contain thee?

Thou art not here; for how should I sustain thee?

But thou, where’er thou art,

Canst hear the voice of prayer,

Canst read the righteous heart.

Thy dwelling who can tell?

Or who, O Lord, hath seen thy secret throne?

But thou art not alone,

Not unapproachable!

O all-containing Mind,

Thou who art everywhere,

Whom all who seek shall find,

Hear me, O Siva! hear the suppliant’s prayer!”



11.



So saying, up he sprung,

And struck the Bell, which self-suspended hung

Before the mystic Rose.

From side to side the silver tongue

Melodious swung, and far and wide

Soul-thrilling tones of heavenly music rung.

Abashed, confounded,

It left the Glendoveer; yea, all astounded

In overpowering fear and deep dismay:

For, when that Bell had sounded,

The Rose, with all the mysteries it surrounded,

The Bell, the Table, and Mount Calasay,

The holy Hill itself, with all thereon,

Even as a morning dream before the day

Dissolves away, they faded, and were gone.



12.



Where shall he rest his wing? where turn for flight?

For all around is Light,

Primal, essential, all-pervading Light!

Heart cannot think, nor tongue declare,

Nor eyes of Angel bear,

That Glory unimaginably bright;

The Sun himself had seemed

A speck of darkness there,

Amid that Light of Light!



13.



Down fell the Glendoveer;

Down through all regions, to our mundane sphere,

He fell: but in his ear

A Voice, which from within him came, was heard,

The indubitable word

Of Him to whom all secret things are known:

“Go, ye who suffer, go to Yamen’s throne;

He hath the remedy for every woe;

He setteth right whate’er is wrong below.”





XX. THE EMBARKATION.



1.



DOWN from the Heaven of Heavens Ereenia fell

Precipitate, yet imperceptible

His fall: nor had he cause nor thought of fear:

And when he came within this mundane sphere,

And felt that Earth was near,

The Glendoveer his azure wings expanded,

And, sloping down the sky

Toward the spot from whence he sprung on high,

There on the shore he landed.



2.



Kailyal advanced to meet him,

Not moving now as she was wont to greet him,

Joy in her eye and in her eager pace:

With a calm smile of melancholy pride

She met him now; and, turning half aside,

Her warning hand repelled the dear embrace.



3.



“Strange things, Ereenia, have befallen us here,”

The Virgin said: “the Almighty Man hath read

The lines which, traced by Nature on my brain,

There to the gifted eye

Make all my fortunes plain,

Mapping the mazes of futurity.

He sued for peace; for it is written there,

That I with him the Amreeta cup must share:

Wherefore he bade me come, and by his side

Sit on the Swerga-throne, his equal bride.

I need not tell thee what reply was given:

My heart, the sure interpreter of Heaven,

His impious words belied.

Thou seest his poor revenge!” So having said,

One look she glanced upon her leprous stain

Indignantly, and shook

Her head in calm disdain.



4.



“O Maid of soul divine!

O more than ever dear,

And more than ever mine!”

Replied the Glendoveer:

“He hath not read, be sure, the mystic ways

Of Fate; almighty as he is, that maze

Hath mocked his fallible sight

Said he the Amreeta cup? So far aright

The Evil One may see; for Fate displays

Her hidden things in part, and part conceals,

Baffling the wicked eye

Alike with what she hides, and what reveals,

When with unholy purpose it would pry

Into the secrets of futurity.

So may it be permitted him to see

Dimly the inscrutable decree;

For to the World below,

Where Yamen guards the Amreeta, we must go:

Thus Siva hath expressed his will; even he,

The Holiest, hath ordained it: there, he saith,

All wrongs shall be redressed

By Yamen, by the righteous Power of Death.”



5.



Forthwith the Father and the fated Maid,

And that heroic Spirit who for them

Such flight had late essayed,

The will of Heaven obeyed:

They went their way along the road

That leads to Yamen’s dread abode.



6.



Many a day hath passed away

Since they began their arduous way,

Their way of toil and pain;

And now their weary feet attain

The Earth’s remotest bound,

Where outer Ocean girds it round.

But not like other Oceans this;

Rather it seemed a drear abyss,

Upon whose brink they stood.

Oh scene of fear! the travellers hear

The raging of the flood;

They hear how fearfully it roars:

But clouds of darker shade than night,

For ever hovering round those shores,

Hide all things from their sight;

The Sun upon that darkness pours

His unavailing light;

Nor ever Moon nor Stars display,

Through the thick shade, one guiding ray

To show the perils of the way.



7.



There, in a creek, a vessel lay:

Just on the confines of the day,

It rode at anchor in its bay,

These venturous pilgrims to convey

Across that outer Sea.

Strange vessel, sure, it seemed to be,

And all unfit for such wild sea!

For through its yawning side the wave

Was oozing in; the mast was frail,

And old and torn its only sail.

How may that crazy vessel brave

The billows that in wild commotion

For ever roar and rave?

How hope to cross the dreadful Ocean

O’er which eternal shadows dwell,

Whose secrets none return to tell?



8.



Well might the travellers fear to enter!

But, summoned once on that adventure,

For them was no retreat.

Nor boots it with reluctant feet

To linger on the strand:

“Aboard! aboard!”

An awful Voice, that left no choice,

Sent forth its stem command:

“Aboard! aboard!”

The travellers hear that voice in fear,

And breathe to Heaven an inward prayer,

And take their seats in silence there.



9.



Self-hoisted then, behold the sail

Expands itself before the gale!

Hands, which they cannot see, let slip

The cable of that fated Ship;

The land-breeze sends her on her way;

And, lo! they leave the living light of day!





XXI. THE WORLD’S END.



1.



SWIFT as an arrow in its flight,

The Ship shot through the incumbent night;

And they have left behind

The raging billows and the roaring wind,

The storm, the darkness, and all mortal fears;

And, lo! another light

To guide their way appears,

The light of other spheres.



2.



That instant from Ladurlad’s heart and brain

The Curse was gone; he feels again

Fresh as in youth’s fair morning, and the Maid

Hath lost her leprous stain.

“The Tyrant, then, hath no dominion here!”

Starting, she cried: “oh, happy, happy hour!

We are beyond his power!”

Then, raising to the Glendoveer,

With heavenly beauty bright, her angel face,

Turned not reluctant now, and met his dear embrace.



3.



Swift glides the Ship with gentle motion

Across that calm and quiet ocean,

That glassy sea, which seemed to be

The mirror of tranquillity.

Their pleasant passage soon was o’er;

The Ship hath reached its destined shore,

A level belt of ice, which bound,

As with an adamantine mound,

The waters of the sleeping Ocean round.

Strange forms were on the strand,

Of earth-born spirits slain before their time,

Who, wandering over sea and sky and land,

Had so fulfilled their term, and now were met

Upon this icy belt, a motley band,

Waiting their summons at the appointed hour,

When each before the Judgment-seat must stand,

And hear his doom from Baly’s righteous power.



4.



Foul with habitual crimes, a hideous crew

Were there, the race of rapine and of blood,

Now, having overpassed the mortal flood,

Their own deformity they knew,

And knew the meed that to their deeds was due

Therefore in fear and agony they stood,

Expecting when the Evil Messenger

Among them should appear. But with their fear

A hope was mingled now:

O’er the dark shade of guilt a deeper hue

It threw, and gave a fiercer character

To the wild eye and lip and sinful brow.

They hoped that soon Kehama would subdue

The inexorable God, and seize his throne,

Reduce the infernal World to his command,

And, with his irresistible right hand,

Redeem them from the vaults of Padalon.



5.



Apart from these, a milder company,

The victims of offences not their own,

Looked when the appointed Messenger should come;

Gathered together some, and some alone,

Brooding in silence on their future doom;

Widows whom, to their husbands’ funeral fire,

Force or strong error led, to share the pyre,

As to their everlasting marriage-bed;

And babes, by sin unstained,

Whom erring parents vowed

To Ganges, and the holy stream profaned

With that strange sacrifice, rite unordained

By Law, by sacred Nature unallowed;

Others, more hapless in their destiny,

Scarce having first inhaled their vital breath,

Whose cradles from some tree

Unnatural hands suspended,

Then left till gentle Death,

Coming like Sleep, their feeble moanings ended;

Or for his prey the ravenous Kite descended;

Or, marching like an army from their caves,

The Pismires blackened o’er, then, bleached and bare,

Left their unhardened bones to fall asunder there.



6.



Innocent Souls! thus set so early free

From sin and sorrow and mortality,

Their spotless spirits all-creating Love

Received into its universal breast.

Yon blue serene above

Was their domain; clouds pillowed them to rest;

The Elements on them like nurses tended,

And with their growth ethereal substance blended.

Less pure than these is that strange Indian bird,

Who never dips in earthly streams her bill,

But, when the sound of coming showers is heard,

Looks up, and from the clouds receives her fill.

Less pure the footless fowl of Heaven, that never

Rest upon earth, but, on the wing for ever

Hovering o’er flowers, their fragrant food inhale,

Drink the descending dew upon its way,

And sleep aloft while floating on the gale.



7.



And thus these innocents, in yonder sky,

Grow and are strengthened, while the allotted years

Perform their course; then hitherward they fly,

Being free from moral taint, so free from fears,

A joyous band, expecting soon to soar

To Indra’s happy spheres,

And mingle with the blessèd company

Of heavenly spirits there for evermore.



8.



A Gulf profound surrounded

This icy belt; the opposite side

With highest rocks was bounded;

But where their heads they hide,

Or where their base is founded,

None could espy. Above all reach of sight

They rose; the second Earth was on their height;

Their feet were fixed in everlasting night.



9.



So deep the Gulf, no eye

Could plumb its dark profundity;

Yet all its depth must try; for this the road

To Padalon, and Yamen’s dread abode.

And, from below, continually

Ministrant Demons rose, and caught

The Souls whose hour was come;

Then, with their burden fraught,

Plunged down, and bore them to receive their doom



10.



Then might be seen who went in hope, and who

Trembled to meet the meed

Of many a foul misdeed, as wild they threw

Their arms retorted from the Demons’ grasp,

And looked around, all eagerly, to seek

For help, where help was none; and strove for aid

To clasp the nearest shade;

Yea, with imploring looks and horrent shriek,

Even from one Demon to another bending,

With hands extending,

Their mercy they essayed.

Still from the verge they strain,

And from the dreadful Gulf avert their eyes,

In vain: down plunge the Demons; and their cries

Feebly, as down they sink, from that profound arise.



11.



What heart of living man could, undisturbed,

Bear sight so sad as this? What wonder there

If Kailyal’s lip were blanched with inmost dread?

The chill which from that icy belt

Struck through her was less keen than what she felt

With her heart’s blood through every limb dispread.

Close to the Glendoveer she clung;

And, clasping round his neck her trembling hands,

She closed her eyes, and there in silence hung.



12.



Then to Ladurlad said the Glendoveer,

“These Demons whom thou seest, the ministers

Of Yamen, wonder to behold us here;

But for the dead they come, and not for us:

Therefore, albeit they gaze upon thee thus,

Have thou no fear.

A little while thou must be left alone,

Till I have borne thy daughter down,

And placed her safely by the throne

Of him who keeps the Gate of Padalon.”



13.



Then, taking Kailyal in his arms, he said,

“Be of good heart, Beloved! it is I

Who bear thee.” Saying this, his wings he spread,

Sprung upward in the sky, and poised his flight;

Then plunged into the Gulf, and sought the World of Night.





XXII. THE GATE OF PADALON.



1.



THE strong foundations of this inmost Earth

Rest upon Padalon. That icy Mound,

Which girt the mortal Ocean round,

Reached the profound,

Ice in the regions of the upper air,

Crystal midway, and adamant below,

Whose strength sufficed to bear

The weight of all this upper World of ours,

And with its rampart closed the Realm of Woe

Eight gates hath Padalon; eight heavenly Powers

Have them in charge, each always at his post,

Lest from their penal caves the accursed host,

Maugre the might of Baly and the God,

Should break, and carry ruin all abroad.



2.



Those gates stand ever open, night and day;

And Souls of mortal men

For ever throng the way.

Some from the dolorous den,

Children of sin and wrath, return no more:

They, fit companions of the Spirits accurst,

Are doomed, like them in baths of fire immersed,

Or weltering upon beds of molten ore,

Or, stretched upon the brazen floor,

Are fastened down with adamantine chains;

While, on their substance inconsumable,

Leeches of fire for ever hang and pull,

And worms of fire for ever gnaw their food,

That, still renewed,

Freshens for ever their perpetual pains.



3.



Others there were whom Baly’s voice condemned,

By long and painful penance, to atone

Their fleshly deeds. Them, from the Judgment throne,

Dread Azyoruca, where she sate involved

In darkness as a tent, received, and dealt

To each the measure of his punishment;

Till, in the central springs of fire, the Will

Impure is purged away; and the freed soul.

Thus fitted to receive a second birth,

Embodied once again, revisits Earth.



4.



But they whom Baly’s righteous voice absolved,

And Yamen, viewing with benignant eye,

Dismissed to seek their heritage on high,

How joyfully they leave this gloomy bourn,

The dread sojourn

Of Guilt and twin-born Punishment and Woe,

And wild Remorse, here linked with worse Despair!

They to the eastern Gate rejoicing go:

The Ship of Heaven awaits their coming there;

And on they sail, greeting the blessed light

Through realms of upper air,

Bound for the Swerga once; but now no more

Their voyage rests upon that happy shore,

Since Indra, by the dreadful Rajah’s might

Compelled, hath taken flight:

On to the second World their way they wend,

And there, in trembling hope, await the doubtful end.



5.



For still in them doth hope predominate,

Faith’s precious privilege, when higher Powers

Give way to fear in these portentous hours.

Behold the Wardens eight!

Each silent at his gate

Expectant stands: they turn their anxious eyes

Within, and, listening to the dizzy din

Of mutinous uproar, each in all his hands

Holds all his weapons, ready for the fight.

For, hark! what clamorous cries

Upon Kehama, for deliverance, call!

“Come, Rajah!” they exclaim; “too long we groan

In torments. Come, Deliverer! yonder throne

Awaits thee. Now, Kehama! Rajah, now!

Earthly Almighty, wherefore tarriest thou?”

Such were the sounds that rung, in wild uproar,

O’er all the echoing vaults of Padalon;

And as the Asuras from the brazen floor,

Struggling against their fetters, strove to rise,

Their clashing chains were heard, and shrieks and cries,

With curses mixed, against the Fiends who urge,

Fierce on their rebel limbs, the avenging scourge.



6.



These were the sounds, which, at the southern Gate,

Assailed Ereenia’s ear: alighting here,

He laid before Neroodi’s feet the Maid,

Who, pale and cold with fear,

Hung on his neck, well-nigh a lifeless weight



7.



“Who and what art thou?” cried the Guardian Power,

Sight so unwonted wondering to behold,

“O Son of Light!

Who comest here at this portentous hour,

When Yamen’s throne

Trembles, and all our might can scarce keep down

The rebel race from seizing Padalon,

Who and what art thou? and what wild despair,

Or wilder hope, from realms of upper air,

Tempts thee to bear

This mortal Maid to our forlorn abodes?

Fitter for her, I ween, the Swerga bowers,

And sweet society of heavenly Powers,

Than this, — a doleful scene,

Even in securest hours.

And whither would ye go?

Alas! can human or celestial ear

Unmaddened hear

The shrieks and yellings of infernal woe?

Can living flesh and blood

Endure the passage of the fiery flood?”



8.



“Lord of the Gate,” replied the Glendoveer,

“We come obedient to the will of Fate;

And haply doomed to bring

Hope and salvation to the Infernal King:

For Siva sends us here;

Even He to whom futurity is known,

The Holiest, bade us go to Yamen’s throne.

Thou seest my precious charge:

Under thy care, secure from harm, I leave her,

While I ascend to bear her Father down:

Beneath the shelter of thine arm receive her I”



9.



Then quoth he to the Maid,

“Be of good cheer, my Kailyal! dearest dear,

In faith subdue thy dread;

Anon I shall be here.” So having said,

Aloft, writh vigorous bound, the Glendoveer

Sprung in celestial might,

And soaring up, in spiral circles, wound

His indefatigable flight.



10.



But, as he thus departed,

The Maid, who at Neroodi’s feet was lying,

Like one entranced or dying,

Recovering strength from sudden terror, started;

And, gazing after him, with straining sight

And straining arms, she stood,

As if in attitude

To win him back from flight.

Yea, she had shaped his name

For utterance, to recall and bid him stay,

Nor leave her thus alone: but virtuous shame

Repressed the unbidden sounds upon their way;

And, calling faith to aid,

Even in this fearful hour the pious Maid

Collected courage, till she seemed to be

Calm and in hope; such power hath piety.

Before the Giant Keeper of the Gate

She crossed her patient arms; and at his feet,

Prepared to meet

The awful will of Fate with equal mind,

She took her seat resigned.



11.



Even the stern trouble of Neroodi’s brow

Relaxed as he beheld the valiant Maid.

Hope, long unfelt till now,

Rose in his heart reviving, and a smile

Dawned in his brightening countenance, the while

He gazed on her with wonder and delight.

“The blessing of the Powers of Padalon,

Virgin, be on thee!” said the admiring God;

“And blessèd be the hour that gave thee birth,

Daughter of Earth!

For thou to this forlorn abode hast brought

Hope, who too long hath been a stranger here.

And surely for no lamentable lot,

Nature, that erreth not,

To thee that heart of fortitude hath given,

Those eyes of purity, that face of love:

If thou beest not the inheretrix of Heaven,

There is no truth above.”



12.



Thus as Neroodi spake, his brow severe

Shone with an inward joy; for sure he thought,

When Siva sent so fair a creature here,

In this momentous hour,

Ere long the World’s deliverance would be wrought,

And Padalon escape the Rajah’s power.

With pious mind, the Maid, in humble guise

Inclined, received his blessing silently,

And raised her grateful eyes

A moment, then again

Abased them at his presence. Hark! on high

The sound of coming wings! — her anxious ears

Have caught the distant sound. Ereenia brings

His burden down! Upstarting from her seat,

How joyfully she rears

Her eager head! and scarce upon the ground

Ladurlad’s giddy feet their footing found,

When with her trembling arms she clasped him round.

No word of greeting,

Nor other sign of joy, at that strange meeting:

Expectant of their fate,

Silent, and hand in hand,

Before the Infernal Gate,

The Father and his pious Daughter stand.



13.



Then to Neroodi said the Glendoveer,

“No Heaven-born Spirit e’er hath visited

This region drear and dread, but I, the first

Who tread your World accurst.

Lord of the Gate, to whom these realms are known,

Direct our fated way to Yamen’s throne.”



14.



“Bring forth my Chariot, Carmala!” quoth then

The Keeper of the way.

It was the Car wherein,

On Yamen’s festal day,

When all the Powers of Hell attend their King,

Yearly to Yamenpur did he repair

To pay his homage there.

Poised on a single wheel, it moved along,

Instinct with motion; by what wondrous skill

Compact, no human tongue could tell,

Nor human wit devise; but on that wheel.

Moving or still,

As if with life indued,

The Car miraculous supported stood.



15.



Then Carmala brought forth two mantles, white

As the swan’s breast, and bright as mountain snow,

When from the wintry sky

The sun, late rising, shines upon the height,

And rolling vapors fill the vale below.

Not without pain the unaccustomed sight

That brightness could sustain;

For neither mortal stain,

Nor parts corruptible, remain.

Nor aught that time could touch or force destroy,

In that pure web whereof the robes were wrought;

So long had it in tenfold fires been tried,

And blanched, and to that brightness purified.

“Apparelled thus, alone,

Children of Earth,” Neroodi cried,

“In safety may ye pass to Yamen’s throne:

Thus only can your living flesh and blood

Endure the passage of the fiery flood.



16.



“Of other frame, O Son of Heaven, art thou!

Yet hast thou now to go

Through regions which thy heavenly mould will try

Glories unutterably bright, I know,

And beams intense of empyrean light,

Thine eye divine can bear; but fires of woe,

The sight of torments, and the cry

Of absolute despair,

Might not these things dismay thee on thy flight,

And thy strong pennons flag and fail thee there?

Trust not thy wings, celestial though thou art,

Nor thy good heart, which horror might assail,

And pity quail,

Pity, in these abodes of no avail;

But take thy seat this mortal pair beside,

And Carmala the infernal Car will guide.

Go, and may happy end your way betide!”

So, as he spake, the self-moved Car rolled on;

And, lo! they pass the Gate of Padalon.





XXIII. PADALON.



1.



WHOE’ER hath loved, with venturous step, to tread

The chambers dread

Of some deep cave, and seen his taper’s beam

Lost in the arch of darkness overhead,

And marked its gleam,

Playing afar upon the sunless stream,

Where from their secret bed,

And course unknown and inaccessible,

The silent waters well,

Whoe’er hath trod such caves of endless night,

He knows, when measuring back the gloomy way,

With what delight refreshed, his eye

Perceives the shadow of the light of day,

Through the far portal slanting, where it falls

Dimly reflected on the watery walls;

How heavenly seems the sky;

And how, with quickened feet, he hastens up,

Eager again to greet

The living World and blessèd sunshine there;

And drink, as from a cup

Of joy, with thirsty lips, the open air.



2.



Far other light than that of day there shone

Upon the travellers entering Padalon.

They, too, in darkness entered on their way;

But, far before the Car,

A glow, as of a fiery furnace light,

Filled all before them. ’Twas a light which made

Darkness itself appear

A thing of comfort; and the sight, dismayed,

Shrunk inward from the molten atmosphere.

Their way was through the adamantine rock

Which girt the World of Woe: on either side

Its massive walls arose, and overhead

Arched the long passage. Onward as they ride,

With stronger glare the light around them spread;

And, lo! the regions dread,

The World of Woe, before them, opening wide.



3.



There rolls the fiery fiood,

Girding the realms of Padalon around:

A sea of flame it seemed to be,

Sea without bound;

For neither mortal nor immortal sight

Could pierce across through that intensest light

A single rib of steel,

Keen as the edge of keenest cimeter,

Spanned this wide gulf of fire. The infernal Car

Rolled to the Gulf, and, on its single wheel

Self-balanced, rose upon that edge of steel.

Red-quivering float the vapors overhead;

The fiery Gulf, beneath them spread,

Tosses its billowing blaze with rush and roar:

Steady and swift the self-moved Chariot went,

Winning the long ascent;

Then, downward rolling, gains the farther shore.



4.



But, oh! what sounds and sights of woe,

What sights and sounds of fear,

Assail the mortal travellers here!

Their way was on a causey straight and wide,

Where penal vaults on either side were seen,

Ranged like the cells wherein

Those wondrous winged alchemists infold

Their stores of liquid gold.

Thick walls of adamant divide

The dungeons; and, from yonder circling flood,

Off-streams of fire through secret channels glide,

And wind among them, and in each provide

An everlasting food

Of rightful torments for the accursed brood.



5.



These were the rebel race, who, in their might

Confiding impiously, would fain have driven

The Deities supreme from highest Heaven;

But by the Suras, in celestial fight,

Opposed and put to flight,

Here, in their penal dens, the accursed crew,

Not for its crime, but for its failure, rue

Their wild ambition. Yet again they long

The contest to renew,

And wield their arms again in happier hour;

And with united power,

Following Kehama’s triumph, to press on

From World to World, and Heaven to Heaven, and Sphere

To Sphere, till Hemakoot shall be their own,

And Meru Mount, and Indra’s Swerga-Bowers,

And Brama’s region, where the heavenly Hours

Weave the vast circle of his age-long day.

Even over Vishnu’s empyreal seat

They trust the Rajah shall extend their sway;

And that the seven-headed Snake, whereon

The strong Preserver sets his conquering feet,

Will rise, and shake him headlong from his throne,

When, in their irresistible array,

Amid the Milky Sea they force their way.

Even higher yet their frantic thoughts aspire;

Yea, on their beds of torment as they lie,

The highest, holiest Siva they defy,

And tell him they shall have anon their day,

When they will storm his realm, and seize Mount Calasay.



6.



Such impious hopes torment

Their raging hearts, impious and impotent;

And now, with unendurable desire

And lust of vengeance, that, like inward fire,

Doth aggravate their punishment, they rave

Upon Kehama; him the accursed rout

Acclaim; with furious cries and maddening shout

They call on him to save:

“Kehama!” they exclaim;

Thundering the dreadful echo rolls about,

And Hell’s whole vault repeats Kehama’s name.



7.



Over these dens of punishment, the host

Of Padalon maintain eternal guard,

Keeping upon the walls their vigilant ward.

At every angle stood

A watch-tower, the decurion Demon’s post,

Where, raised on high, he viewed with sleepless eye

His trust, that all was well. And over these,

Such was the perfect discipline of Hell,

Captains of fifties and of hundreds held

Authority, each in his loftier tower;

And chiefs of legions over them had power;

And thus all Hell with towers was girt around.

Aloft the brazen turrets shone

In the red light of Padalon;

And on the walls between,

Dark moving, the infernal Guards were seen,

Gigantic Demons, pacing to and fro;

Who ever and anon,

Spreading their crimson pennons, plunged below,

Faster to rivet down the Asuras’ chains,

And, with the snaky scourge and fiercer pains,

Repress their rage rebellious. Loud around,

In mingled sound, the echoing lash, the clash

Of chains, the ponderous hammer’s iron stroke,

With execrations, groans, and shrieks and cries,

Combined in one wild dissonance, arise;

And through the din there broke,

Like thunder heard through all the warring winds,

The dreadful name. “Kehama,” still they rave,

“Hasten and save!

Now, now, Deliverer! now, Kehama, now!

Earthly Almighty, wherefore tarriest thou?”



8.



Oh! if that name abhorred,

Thus uttered, could well-nigh

Dismay the Powers of Hell, and daunt their Lord,

How fearfully to Kailyal’s ear it came!

She, as the Car rolled on its rapid way,

Bent down her head, and closed her eyes for dread;

And deafening, with strong effort from within,

Her ears against the din,

Covered and pressed them close with both her hands.

Sure, if the mortal Maiden had not fed

On heavenly food, and long been strengthened

With heavenly converse for such end vouchsafed,

Her human heart had failed, and she had died

Beneath the horrors of this awful hour.

But Heaven supplied a power

Beyond her earthly nature, to the measure

Of need infusing strength;

And Fate, whose secret and unerring pleasure

Appointed all, decreed

An ample meed and recompense at length.

High-fated Maid, the righteous hour is nigh!

The all-embracing Eye

Of Retribution still beholdeth thee;

Bear onward to the end, O Maid! courageously.



9.



On rolled the Car; and, lo! afar

Upon its height the towers of Yamenpur

Rise on the astonished sight.

Behold the Infernal City, Yamen’s seat

Of empire, in the midst of Padalon,

Where the eight causeys meet!

There, on a rock of adamant, it stood,

Resplendent far and wide,

Itself of solid diamond edified,

And all around it rolled the fiery flood.

Eight bridges arched the stream; huge piles of brass

Magnificent, such structures as beseem

The Seat and Capital of such great God,

Worthy of Yamen’s own august abode.

A brazen tower and gateway at each end

Of each was raised, where Giant Wardens stood,

Stationed in arms the passage to defend,

That never foe might cross the fiery flood.



10.



Oh, what a gorgeous sight it was to see

The Diamond City blazing on its height,

With more than mid-sun splendor, by the light

Of its own fiery river! —

Its towers and domes and pinnacles and spires,

Turrets and battlements, that flash and quiver

Through the red, restless atmosphere for ever;

And, hovering overhead,

The smoke and vapors of all Padalon,

Fit firmament for such a world, were spread,

With surge and swell and everlasting motion,

Heaving and opening like tumultuous ocean.



11.



Nor were there wanting there

Such glories as beseemed such region well;

For though with our blue heaven and genial air

The firmament of Hell might not compare,

As little might our earthly tempests vie

With the dread storms of that infernal sky,

Whose clouds of all metallic elements

Sublimed were full. For, when its thunder broke,

Not all the united World’s artillery,

In one discharge, could equal that loud stroke;

And though the Diamond Towers and Battlements

Stood firm upon their adamantine rock,

Yet, while it volleyed round the vault of Hell,

Earth’s solid arch was shaken with the shock,

And Cities in one mighty ruin fell.

Through the red sky terrific meteors scour;

Huge stones come hailing down; or sulphur-shower,

Floating amid the lurid air like snow,

Kindles in its descent,

And with blue fire-drops rains on all below.

At times the whole supernal element,

Igniting, burst in one vast sheet of flame,

And roared as with the sound

Of rushing winds, above, below, around;

Anon the flame was spent, and overhead

A heavy cloud of moving darkness spread.



12.



Straight to the brazen bridge and gate

The self-moved Chariot bears its mortal load.

At sight of Carmala,

On either side the Giant Guards divide,

And give the Chariot way.

Up yonder winding road it rolls along,

Swift as the bittern soars on spiral wing;

And, lo, the Palace of the Infernal King!



13.



Two forms inseparable in unity

Hath Yamen; even as with hope or fear

The Soul regardeth him doth he appear;

For hope and fear,

At that dread hour, from ominous conscience spring,

And err not in their bodings. Therefore some,

They who polluted with offences come,

Behold him as the King

Of Terrors, black of aspect, red of eye,

Reflecting back upon the sinful mind,

Heightened with vengeance and with wrath divine,

Its own inborn deformity.

But, to the righteous Spirit, how benign

His awful countenance,

Where, tempering justice with parental love,

Goodness, and heavenly grace,

And sweetest mercy, shine! Yet is he still

Himself the same, — one form, one face, one will;

And these his twofold aspects are but one;

And change is none

In him, for change in Yamen could not be:

The Immutable is he.



14.



He sate upon a marble sepulchre,

Massive and huge, where, at the Monarch’s feet,

The righteous Baly had his Judgment-seat.

A Golden Throne before them vacant stood;

Three human forms sustained its ponderous weight,

With lifted hands outspread, and shoulders bowed

Bending beneath the load.

A fourth was wanting. They were of the hue

Of coals of fire; yet were they flesh and blood,

And living breath they drew;

And their red eyeballs rolled with ghastly stare,

As thus, for their misdeeds, they stood tormented there.



15.



On steps of gold those living Statues stood,

Who bore the Golden Throne. A cloud behind

Immovable was spread; not all the light

Of all the flames and fires of Padalon

Could pierce its depth of night.

There Azyoruca veiled her awful form

In those eternal shadows; there she sate,

And as the trembling Souls, who crowd around

The Judgment-seat, receive the doom of fate,

Her giant arms, extending from the clouds

Drew them within the darkness. Moving out

To grasp and bear away the innumerous rout,

For ever and for ever thus were seen

The thousand mighty arms of that dread Queen.



16.



Here, issuing from the Car, the Glendoveer

Did homage to the God, then raised his head.

“Suppliants we come,” he said;

“I need not tell thee by what wrongs oppressed,

For nought can pass on earth to thee unknown;

Sufferers from tyranny, we seek for rest,

And Siva bade us go to Yamen’s throne;

Here, he hath said, all wrongs shall be redressed.”

Yamen replied, “Even now the hour draws near,

When Fate its hidden ways will manifest.

Not for light purpose would the Wisest send

His suppliants here, when we, in doubt and fear,

The awful issue of the hour attend:

Wait ye in patience and in faith the end!”





XXIV. THE AMREETA.



1.



So spake the King of Padalon; when, lo!

The voice of lamentation ceased in Hell.

And sudden silence all around them fell,

Silence more wild and terrible

Than all the infernal dissonance before.

Through that portentous stillness, far away,

Unwonted sounds were heard, advancing on,

And deepening on their way;

For now the inexorable hour

Was come, and in the fulness of his power,

Now that the dreadful rites had all been done.

Kehama from the Swerga hastened down

To seize upon the throne of Padalon.



2.



He came in all his might and majesty,

With all his terrors clad, and all his pride;

And by the attribute of Deity,

Which he had won from Heaven, self-multiplied,

The Almighty Man appeared on every side.

In the same indivisible point of time,

At the eight Gates he stood at once, and beat

The Warden-Gods of Hell beneath his feet;

Then, in his brazen Cars of triumph, straight,

At the same moment, drove through every gate.

By Aullays, hugest of created kind,

Fiercest, and fleeter than the viewless wind,

His Cars were drawn, — ten yokes of ten abreast..

What less sufficed for such almighty weight?

Eight bridges from the fiery flood arose,

Growing before his way; and on he goes,

And drives the thundering Chariot-wheels along,

At once o’er all the roads of Padalon.



3.



Silent and motionless remain

The Asuras on their bed of pain,

Waiting, with breathless hope, the great event.

All Hell was hushed in dread,

Such awe that omnipresent coming spread;

Nor had its voice been heard, though all its rout

Innumerable had lifted up one shout;

Nor, if the infernal firmament

Had in one unimaginable burst

Spent its collected thunders, had the sound

Been audible, such louder terrors went

Before his forms substantial. Round about,

The presence scattered lightnings far and wide,

That quenched on every side,

With their intensest blaze, the feebler fire

Of Padalon, even as the stars go out,

When, with prodigious light,

Some blazing meteor fills the astonished night.



4.



The Diamond City shakes!

The adamantine Rock

Is loosened with the shock!

From its foundation moved, it heaves and quakes;

The brazen portals, crumbling, fall to dust;

Prone fall the Giant Guards,

Beneath the Aullays crushed;

On, on, through Yamenpur, their thundering feet

Speed from all points to Yamen’s Judgment-seat

And, lo! where multiplied,

Behind, before him, and on every side,

Wielding all weapons in his countless hands,

Around the Lord of Hell Kehama stands!

Then, too, the Lord of Hell put forth his might:

Thick darkness, blacker than the blackest night,

Rose from their wrath, and veiled

The unutterable fight.

The power of Fate and Sacrifice prevailed,

And soon the strife was done.

Then did the Man-God re-assume

His unity, absorbing into one

The consubstantiate shapes; and, as the gloom

Opened, fallen Yamen on the ground was seen,

His neck beneath the conquering Rajah’s feet,

Who on the marble tomb

Had his triumphal seat.



5.



Silent the Man-Almighty sate; a smile

Gleamed on his dreadful lips, the while,

Dallying with power, he paused from following up

His conquest, as a man in social hour

Sips of the grateful cup,

Again and yet again, with curious taste,

Searching its subtile flavor ere he drink;

Even so Kehama now forbore his haste,

Having within his reach whate’er he sought.

On his own haughty power he seemed to muse,

Pampering his arrogant heart with silent thought.

Before him stood the Golden Throne in sight,

Right opposite; he could not choose but see,

Nor, seeing, choose but wonder. “Who are ye

Who bear the Golden Throne tormented there?”

He cried; “for whom doth Destiny prepare

The Imperial Seat? and why are ye but Three?”



6.



FIRST STATUE.

I of the Children of Mankind was first,

Me miserable! who, adding store to store,

Heaped up superfluous wealth; and now, accurst,

For ever I the frantic crime deplore.



SECOND STATUE.

I, o’er my Brethren of Mankind the first

Usurping power, set up a throne sublime,

A King and Conqueror; therefore, thus accurst.

For ever I in vain repent the crime.



THIRD STATUE.

I on the Children of Mankind the first,

In God’s most holy name, imposed a tale

Of impious falsehood; therefore, thus accurst,

For ever I in vain the crime bewail.



7.



“Even as thou here beholdest us,

Here we have stood, tormented thus,

Such countless ages, that they seem to be

Long as eternity;

And still we are but Three.

A Fourth will come to share

Our pain, at yonder vacant corner bear

His portion of the burden, and complete

The Golden Throne for Yamen’s Judgment-seat

Thus hath it been appointed: he must be

Equal in guilt to us, the guilty Three.

Kehama, come! too long we wait for thee!”



8.



Thereat, with one accord,

The Three took up the word, like choral song,

“Come, Rajah! Man-God! Earth’s Almighty Lord

Kehama, come! we wait for thee too long.”



9.



A short and sudden laugh of wondering pride

Burst from him in his triumph: to reply

Scornful he deigned not; but with altered eye,

Wherein some doubtful meaning seemed to lie,

He turned to Kailyal. “Maiden,” thus he cried,

“I need not bid thee see

How vain it is to strive with Fate’s decree,

When hither thou hast fled to fly from me,

And, lo! even here thou find’st me at thy side.

Mine thou must be, being doomed with me to share

The Amreeta Cup of immortality;

Yea, by Myself I swear,

It hath been thus appointed. Joyfully

Join then thy hand and heart and will with mine,

Nor at such glorious destiny repine,

Nor in thy folly more provoke my wrath divine.”



10.



She answered, “I have said. It must not be!

Almighty as thou art,

Thou hast put all things underneath thy feet;

But still the resolute heart

And virtuous will are free.

Never, oh! never, never, can there be

Communion, Rajah, between thee and me!”



11.



“Once more,” quoth he, “I urge, and once alone.

Thou seest yon Golden Throne,

Where I anon shall set thee by my side;

Take thou thy seat thereon,

Kehama’s willing bride,

And I will place the Kingdoms of the World

Beneath thy Father’s feet,

Appointing him the King of mortal men:

Else underneath that Throne,

The Fourth supporter, he shall stand and groan;

Prayers will be vain to move my mercy then.”



12.



Again the Virgin answered,” I have said!”

Ladurlad caught her in his proud embrace,

While on his neck she hid

In agony her face.



13.



“Bring forth the Amreeta Cup!” Kehama cried

To Yamen, rising sternly in his pride.

“It is within the Marble Sepulchre,”

The vanquished Lord of Padalon replied;

“Bid it be opened.”—” Give thy treasure up!”

Exclaimed the Man-Almighty to the Tomb.

And at his voice and look

The massy fabric shook, and opened wide.

A huge Anatomy was seen reclined

Within its marble womb. “Give me the Cup!”

Again Kehama cried: no other charm

Was needed than that voice of stern command.

From his repose the ghastly form arose,

Put forth his bony and gigantic arm,

And gave the Amreeta to the Rajah’s hand.

‘Take, drink!” with accents dread the Spectre said;

“For thee and Kailyal hath it been assigned,

Ye only of the Children of Mankind.”



14.



Then was the Man-Almighty’s heart elate:

“This is the consummation!” he exclaimed;

“Thus have I triumphed over Death and Fate.

Now, Siva, look to thine abode!

Henceforth, on equal footing we engage,

Alike immortal now; and we shall wage

Our warfare, God to God!”

Joy filled his impious soul,

And to his lips he raised the fatal bowl.



15.



Thus long the Glendoveer had stood

Watching the wonders of the eventful hour,

Amazed, but undismayed; for in his heart

Faith, overcoming fear, maintained its power.

Nor had that faith abated, when the God

Of Padalon was beaten down in fight;

For then he looked to see the heavenly might

Of Siva break upon them. But, when now

He saw the Amreeta in Kehama’s hand,

An impulse which defied all self-command

In that extremity

Stung him, and he resolved to seize the cup,

And dare the Rajah’s force in Siva’s sight.

Forward he sprung to tempt the unequal fray,

When, lo! the Anatomy,

With warning arm, withstood his desperate way;

And from the Golden Throne the Fiery Three

Again, in one accord, renewed their song,

“Kehama, come! we wait for thee too long.”



16.



O fool of drunken hope and frantic vice!

Madman! to seek for power beyond thy scope

Of knowledge, and to deem

Less than Omniscience could suffice

To wield Omnipotence! O fool, to dream

That immortality could be

The meed of evil! — yea, thou hast it now,

Victim of thine own wicked heart’s device;

Thou hast thine object now, and now must pay the

price.



17.



He did not know the holy mystery

Of that divinest cup, that as the lips

Which touch it, even such its quality,

Good or malignant. Madman! and he thinks

The blessed prize is won, and joyfully he drinks.



18.



Then Siva opened on the Accursed One

His Eye of Anger: upon him alone

The wrath-beam fell. He shudders, — but too late:

The deed is done;

The dreadful liquor works the will of Fate.

Immortal he would be,

Immortal he is made: but through his veins

Torture at once and immortality,

A stream of poison doth the Amreeta run;

And, while within the burning anguish flows,

His outward body glows,

Like molten ore, beneath the avenging Eye,

Doomed thus to live and burn eternally.



19.



The Fiery Three,

Beholding him, set up a fiendish cry,

A song of jubilee I

“Come, Brother, come!” they sung; “too long

Have we expected thee;

Henceforth we bear no more

The unequal weight. Come, Brother, we are Four!”



20.



Vain his almightiness: for mightier pain

Subdued ail power; pain ruled supreme alone;

And, yielding to the bony hand

The unemptied cup, he moved toward the Throne,

And at the vacant corner took his stand.

Behold the Golden Throne at length complete!

And Yamen silently ascends the Judgment-seat



21.



“For two alone, of all mankind, to me

The Amreeta Cup was given,”

Then said the Anatomy:

The Man hath drunk; the Woman’s turn is next

Come, Kailyal, come, receive thy doom,

And do the Will of Heaven!”

Wonder and Fear and Awe at once perplexed

The mortal Maiden’s heart; but, over all,

Hope rose triumphant. With a trembling hand,

Obedient to his call,

She took the fated Cup; and lifting up

Her eyes, where holy tears began to swell,

“Is it not your command,

Ye Heavenly Powers?” as on her knees she fell,

The pious Virgin cried:

“Ye know my innocent will, my heart sincere;

Ye govern all things still,

And wherefore should I fear?”



22.



She said, and drank. The Eye of Mercy beamed

Upon the Maid; a cloud of fragrance steamed

Like incense-smoke as all her mortal frame

Dissolved beneath the potent agency

Of that mysterious draught; such quality

From her pure touch the fated Cup partook.

Like one entranced she knelt,

Feeling her body melt

Till all but what was heavenly passed away:

Yet still she felt

Her Spirit strong within her, the same heart,

With the same loves, and all her heavenly part

Unchanged, and ripened to such perfect state

In this miraculous birth, as here, on Earth,

Dimly our holiest hopes anticipate.



23.



“Mine! mine!” with rapturous joy Ereenia cried;

“Immortal now, and yet not more divine;

Mine, mine, — for ever mine!”

The immortal Maid replied,

“For ever, ever, thine!”



24.



Then Yamen said, “O thou to whom by Fate,

Alone of all mankind, this lot is given,

Daughter of Earth, but now the Child of Heaven!

Go with thy heavenly Mate,

Partaker now of his immortal bliss;

Go to the Swerga-Bowers,

And there recall the hours

Of endless happiness.”



25.



But that sweet Angel, — for she still retained

Her human loves and human piety,

As if reluctant at the God’s commands,

Lingered, with anxious eye

Upon her Father fixed, and spread her hands

Toward him wistfully.

“Go!” Yamen said, “nor cast that look behind

Upon Ladurlad at this parting hour,

For thou shalt find him in thy Mother’s Bower.”



26.



The Car — for Carmala his word obeyed —

Moved on, and bore away the Maid;

While from the Golden Throne the Lord of Death

With love benignant on Ladurlad smiled,

And gently on his head his blessing laid.

As sweetly as a Child,

Whom neither thought disturbs nor care encumbers.

Tired with long play at close of summer-day,

Lies down and slumbers;

Even thus, as sweet a boon of sleep partaking,

By Yamen blest, Ladurlad sunk to rest.

Blessèd that sleep! more blessed was the waking!

For on that night a heavenly morning broke:

The light of heaven was round him when he woke;

And in the Swerga, in Yedillian’s Bower,

All whom he loved he met, to part no more.